 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
European Journal of Operational Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eor  
Innovative applications of O.R.
The stochastic location-routing problem with parallel truck–drone 
operations for humanitarian aid delivery
Hannan Tureci-Isik a
 ,∗, Melih Çelik a
 , Ece Sanci b
a School of Management, University of Bath, Convocation Avenue, Claverton Down, Bath, BA2  7AY, United Kingdom
b Amazon Logistics, 1 Principal Place, Worship Street, London, EC2A  2FA, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Humanitarian logistics
Truck–drone routing
Location-routing problem
Stochastic programming
Variable neighbourhood search
 A B S T R A C T
Timely response in the aftermath of a disaster is crucial to alleviate loss of life and suffering. Timeliness of 
relief may be hampered by road network disruptions caused by the disaster, such as damage to road segments 
or debris covering the roads. The use of drones simultaneously with trucks can potentially help overcome issues 
around network disruptions and achieve more timely delivery of post-disaster aid. In an effort to shed more 
light into this potential, we address the problem of network design for parallel truck–drone operations by depot 
location prior to the disaster and routing of the vehicles in its aftermath. We incorporate the uncertainty on 
network disruption by modelling this problem as a two-stage stochastic program, which proves computationally 
challenging to solve to optimality for real-life disaster scenarios. Consequently, we propose a tailored heuristic 
based on variable neighbourhood search to find high-quality solutions efficiently. Our computational results 
on randomly generated instances and a case study from the 2011 Van Earthquake in Turkiye demonstrate 
the effectiveness of the heuristic, the benefits of employing both trucks and drones, and the significance of 
accounting for uncertainties in pre-disaster planning.
1. Introduction
In the aftermath of large-scale disasters (e.g., earthquakes, hurri-
canes, terrorist attacks), timely response to the needs of the benefi-
ciaries is crucial. Logistics accounts for 80 percent of disaster relief 
efforts (Kovács & Spens, 2007), with infrastructure networks including 
roads, power, and telecommunications playing a vital role in disaster 
response by facilitating search-and-rescue operations, evacuation, and 
distribution of relief items. However, these networks are also vul-
nerable to the effects of disasters. Road networks, in particular, can 
be compromised by collapsed segments and bridges, blockage due to 
debris, and damage to critical facilities. As ground vehicles are the 
primary means of transportation for humanitarian aid, such disrup-
tions can isolate beneficiary locations from relief aid vehicles (Celik, 
2016). Originally designed for military purposes, unmanned air vehi-
cles (UAVs) offer significant potential to overcome these challenges by 
being able to reach isolated areas in a timely manner.
UAVs (or drones) have already found a wide range of applica-
tions outside humanitarian aid such as terrain mapping, agricultural 
spraying, wildlife monitoring and conservation (Otto et al., 2018). In 
the field of logistics, many companies have started carrying out part 
of their last-mile delivery operations using drones (Amazon, 2023; 
Walmart, 2024). Despite the initially restrictive regulations on UAV 
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ht631@bath.ac.uk (H. Tureci-Isik).
use due to privacy, security and operational concerns, enhancements in 
technology and familiarity with their potential have meant that these 
restrictions are being gradually relaxed over the recent years (Young, 
2024). In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration has 
authorised companies including UPS, uAvionics, and Zipline to operate 
beyond visual line of sight and use the collected data in their ongoing 
policy making activities for drones (FAA, 2023a, 2023b). In the United 
Kingdom, the Civil Aviation Authority has recently put forward similar 
measures to expand drone use for commercial and non-commercial 
activities. (The Guardian, 2024).
Drones are also being increasingly used in humanitarian relief. For 
example, as one of the earliest adopters in the humanitarian sector, 
The United Nations World Food Programme uses drones for food aid 
delivery in areas with significant access limitations (World Food Pro-
gramme, 2023). The Uganda Ministry of Health, in collaboration with 
other non-governmental organisations, uses drones to send HIV/AIDS 
medicines to island communities with high HIV prevalence around 
Lake Victoria (The Guardian, 2021). The drone company Matternet 
transports biomedical supplies between hospitals in Zurich, and lab 
samples in Berlin, and has launched operations for medical supply 
delivery between facilities in Abu Dhabi (Matternet, 2024).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2025.08.057
Received 26 July 2024; Accepted 28 August 2025
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
Available online 2 September 2025 
0377-2217/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
Please cite this article as: Hannan Tureci-Isik et al., European Journal of Operational Research, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2025.08.057 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Despite their advantages in improving accessibility in disrupted 
networks, drones are also limited in their range and battery life. Conse-
quently, most humanitarian aid delivery involving drones is performed 
in conjunction with ground vehicles, particularly trucks. A growing 
body of literature on routing trucks and drones for last-mile deliveries 
in both for-profit and humanitarian applications has considered various 
ways in which such operations can be performed, such as independent 
deliveries by both vehicles from depots, synchronised operations where 
the drone travels on the truck and both perform deliveries, and one ve-
hicle supporting the delivery operations carried out by the other (Otto 
et al., 2018). On the other hand, there is limited research on optimising 
parallel delivery of humanitarian aid by trucks and drones, despite their 
widespread use in practice.
The efficiency and effectiveness of truck–drone delivery operations 
rely heavily on the supporting transportation network. Depots play a 
crucial role in this support by storing relief items, acting as a base for 
launching and recharging drones, loading and unloading trucks, and 
coordinating the deliveries by trucks and drones. In designing the net-
work, the decision of where to locate these depots is an important one 
due to its direct influence the timeliness of aid deliveries. Pre-disaster 
location decisions save time for subsequent relief delivery by enabling 
immediate dispatch of vehicles, compared to making such decisions 
during the response stage. However, these pre-disaster decisions must 
also account for disaster-related uncertainties, such as the impact on 
the transportation network, as the type, location, and magnitude of the 
disaster are not known in advance.
In this paper, we address the decisions of pre-disaster depot location 
and post-disaster relief aid delivery by trucks and drones that operate 
independently, where the post-disaster travel times on the road net-
work are uncertain. Contrary to the literature on truck–drone routing 
where the main objective is to minimise makespan or operational costs, 
we prioritise the timeliness of deliveries by considering an objective 
that aims to minimise the expected average arrival time to all benefi-
ciaries. The objective reflects the cumulative urgency of aid delivery 
across multiple communities, especially in the immediate aftermath 
of a disaster where early access to relief can prevent deterioration of 
health and safety. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study 
that considers such a latency-based objective in a stochastic location-
routing problem involving the parallel use of trucks and drones for 
last-mile humanitarian aid delivery. Our problem definition and the 
network structure lead to a novel two-stage mixed integer stochas-
tic programming model that can only solve small-sized instances to 
optimality using commercial solvers. To overcome this challenge, we 
propose a variable neighbourhood search heuristic, which produces 
high-quality solutions for larger instances within reasonable time limits. 
We use a case study from the 2011 Van Earthquake in Turkiye to 
understand the structure of resulting tours, as well as to compare 
our approach to benchmarks involving only trucks, no assessment on 
road network damage, and separate location and routing decisions. 
The computational results underline the potential effectiveness of our 
approach and present insights that can be of benefit to decision makers.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 
presents a literature review on truck–drone delivery models and stoch-
astic location-routing problems in humanitarian operations. Section 3 
outlines the problem definition and provides the two-stage stochas-
tic mixed integer programming model. In Section 4, we introduce 
a problem-tailored variable neighbourhood search heuristic to solve 
the instances of practical size. Section 5 details the computational 
experiments and provides the managerial insights from our findings. 
Concluding remarks and further research directions are presented in 
Section 6.
2. Literature review
This paper is positioned at the intersection of truck–drone delivery 
problems, location-routing problems with heterogeneous fleets and 
multiple vehicle types, and stochastic location-routing problems in 
humanitarian operations. In this section, we present an overview of 
these three streams and the contributions of our work to the literature.
2.1. Truck–drone delivery problems
Due to the increase in application areas and technological advances 
for using drones in last-mile delivery, there is increased interest on 
truck–drone operations in the extant literature. An extensive review 
to date on the combined operations of drones with other vehicles 
in the non-military context is provided in Otto et al. (2018). Other 
reviews that discuss truck–drone combined operations include Chung 
et al. (2020) on optimisation methods, Macrina et al. (2020) on par-
cel delivery, Rojas Viloria et al. (2021) on relevant vehicle routing 
problems, Moshref-Javadi and Winkenbach (2021) on general logistics 
applications, and Yucesoy et al. (2024) on their use in disaster response. 
In their review of facility location for drone delivery, Dukkanci et al. 
(2023) point out that 95% of the literature on facility location for 
truck–drone deliveries considers commercial applications, with only 
one paper (Chowdhury et al., 2017) in humanitarian response. Our 
paper aims to bridge this gap in the literature.
The literature on truck–drone delivery can be divided into three 
categories in terms of the delivery structure.
Models in the first category consider a primary vehicle type (truck 
or drone) that makes the deliveries, while the other vehicle type 
supports the operations. In Ferrandez et al. (2016), drones make the 
deliveries, while trucks serve as launching stations, so that the effective 
coverage area of drones is expanded. Scott and Scott (2019) propose a 
structure in which drones make the last-mile deliveries, whereas trucks 
supply the humanitarian aid to drone stations from a warehouse. They 
formulate a location-routing problem to determine the locations of the 
warehouse and drone nests. Zhou et al. (2023) study a similar structure, 
locating drone stations in 2-D space. They model the problem as a 
constrained nonlinear optimisation, and present a solution approach 
based on particle swarm optimisation with a subordinate dynamic pro-
gramme, using healthcare delivery as a case study. Variations of such 
structure are previously studied by Kim and Moon (2018) and Schermer 
et al. (2019) to extend the drone service range. McCunney and Cauwen-
berghe (2019) and Dayarian et al. (2020) propose drone-supported 
truck deliveries, with the drones resupplying the trucks directly or 
supplying the depots within a same-day delivery framework.
The second group of delivery structures involves a synchronised 
truck–drone delivery model where the drone travels with the truck and 
both vehicles perform deliveries. The routing problem corresponding 
to this version of truck–drone tandem delivery is more commonly 
known as the Flying Sidekick Travelling Salesman Problem (Murray 
& Chu, 2015) or the TSP with Drones (Agatz et al., 2018). In this 
case, the drone travels with a truck to extend its service area, launches 
from the truck, delivers the items, and lands back on the truck again. 
Meanwhile, after the drone takes off, the truck continues its tour and 
visits the next demand location, and the two vehicles meet at one of 
the demand locations. Moshref-Javadi and Lee (2017) consider tandem 
deliveries for situations such as disaster relief and emergencies, using 
a latency-based objective. Although their setting is humanitarian, their 
model does not incorporate any uncertainties and focuses solely on the 
routing problem. Yin et al. (2023) also address the routing problem in 
humanitarian operations under demand and travel time uncertainties. 
They develop a robust optimisation model using a budgeted uncertainty 
set and propose a branch-and-price-and-cut algorithm, applying it to 
a real earthquake case study. Mirzapour Al-e Hashem et al. (2024) 
apply tandem delivery to a postal delivery system, considering weather-
related uncertainties. They model the problem as a robust optimisation 
and develop a hybrid metaheuristic solution approach. Kang and Lee 
(2021) utilise heterogeneous drones with different limitations and de-
velop an exact algorithm for the routing problem using logic-based 
Bender decomposition. Morim et al. (2024) extend truck–drone tandem 
routing by incorporating robot deliveries. When a truck visits a robot 
station, it activates the station, and pre-positioned robots then perform 
return deliveries. Gómez-Lagos et al. (2021) introduce a variant of 
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
2 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
truck–drone tandem delivery, where the truck can park at a non-
customer location during its tour, allowing drones to make return trips 
from either demand nodes or parking lots. They apply a GRASP meta-
heuristic to minimise makespan, incorporating truck routing, drone 
trips, and parking lot selection in the procedure. Similarly, Montaña 
et al. (2022) allow drone launches from truck but only when the truck 
is at a parking lot, and also include parking lot selection in their model. 
There is substantial literature on synchronised models; the interested 
reader is referred to Moshref-Javadi et al. (2021) for a comprehensive 
literature review to date, and to Dukkanci et al. (2024) for facility 
location considerations.
Our study belongs to the third category of truck–drone delivery 
operations, where trucks and drones perform deliveries in parallel from 
the depots. Murray and Chu (2015) first formalise this problem as 
the Parallel Drone Scheduling Travelling Salesman Problem (PDSTSP). 
They formulate a mixed integer program and develop a two-phase 
heuristic to solve it for large-sized instances. For a single pair of 
truck and drone, Mbiadou Saleu et al. (2018) develop an iterative 
two-step heuristic and Dell’Amico et al. (2020) propose matheuristic 
methods. Nguyen et al. (2022) extend the PDSTSP to involve multiple 
trucks and drones and propose a heuristic algorithm. Kloster et al. 
(2023) consider a variant of parallel operations where trucks make 
deliveries along their tours, and when a truck visits a pre-positioned 
robot station, the station is activated to enable return-trip deliveries 
by drones or robots. Some of the earlier studies categorised under the 
first category of truck–drone operations, those using drone nests or 
stations (e.g., Kim & Moon, 2018; Schermer et al., 2019; Scott & Scott, 
2019; Zhou et al., 2023), can also be interpreted as variants of the 
PDSTSP. In these models, trucks support drone operations by transport-
ing packages to drone stations, from which drones conduct last-mile 
deliveries to extend their range. While these studies involve location-
routing decisions due to the inclusion of station location choices, they 
do not incorporate uncertainty in their models.
Only a few studies on the PDSTSP variants address uncertain-
ties. Rezaei Kallaj et al. (2023) tackle blood delivery by trucks and 
drones in disaster scenarios, accounting for supply and demand uncer-
tainties using a two-stage stochastic model and particle swarm opti-
misation for its solution. Van Steenbergen et al. (2023) address travel 
time uncertainties in post-disaster relief with a stochastic dynamic pro-
gram and deep reinforcement learning. Studies incorporating network 
design into PDSTSP are also scarce. Cokyasar et al. (2021) address 
the decision of locating automated battery swapping machines in a 
commercial delivery setting and solve the problem with a derivative-
supported cutting-plane method. Chowdhury et al. (2017) uniquely 
integrate network design and uncertainty, using drones when trucks 
are unavailable and employing a probabilistic approach to road access, 
with routes determined through a continuous approximation method.
2.2. Location-routing problems with heterogeneous fleets and multiple vehi-
cle types
A significant amount of literature exists on the Location-Routing 
Problem (LRP). Comprehensive reviews on the problem are given 
in the survey papers by Nagy and Salhi (2007), Prodhon and Prins 
(2014), Drexl and Schneider (2015), Schneider and Drexl (2017),
Albareda-Sambola and Rodríguez-Pereira (2019), and Mara et al. 
(2021). The work in this paper is a special case of the LRP with 
heterogeneous fleets and multiple vehicle types. For the sake of brevity, 
we focus our attention to the papers in this stream of literature.
Due to its practical applicability, the LRP with heterogeneous ve-
hicles has gained significant attention in the literature. Among the 
recent exact approaches to tackle the problem, Çalık et al. (2021) 
use a Benders decomposition approach to solve the resulting mixed 
integer program, whereas (Wang et al., 2025) devise a branch-and-
price-and-cut algorithm using bidirectional labelling for a variant of 
the problem that minimises emission and operational costs. Due to 
the inherent complexity of solving the problem to optimality, heuris-
tic and metaheuristic approaches are more commonly used. Among 
these, Koç et al. (2016) use an evolutionary algorithm for the problem 
involving time windows, Zhao et al. (2018) propose a cooperative 
approximation approach, Amiri et al. (2019) use Lagrangean decom-
position for a multi-echelon application in offshore oil and gas supply 
chains, and Wang et al. (2019) employ multiple neighbourhood search 
algorithms for a multiobjective version of the problem.
The LRP with multiple vehicle types is relevant to the problem 
addressed in this paper due to the involvement of multiple networks 
for vehicle routing. Klibi et al. (2010) consider a multiperiod version 
of the Stochastic LRP where customers can be served by full or less-
than-truckload shipments, using a tabu search heuristic to find efficient 
solutions. Snoeck et al. (2018) make network design and fleet planning 
decisions for Coca Cola in Bogota using a linear approximation of 
the resulting mathematical model. Zhou et al. (2019) use a hybrid 
genetic algorithm and simulated annealing approach on a variant with 
simultaneous home delivery and customer pickup. De Maio et al. 
(2023) focus on an application in the dairy industry with stochastic 
demands and make use of an indifference zoning approach to solve the 
problem. Ozyavas et al. (2025) consider a parcel locker delivery system 
with trucks at the upstream and bike deliveries at the downstream of 
the chain, solving the problem using a branch-and-price algorithm.
2.3. Stochastic location-routing problems in humanitarian operations
In this section, we provide an overview of relevant applications 
of the Stochastic Location-Routing Problem in humanitarian opera-
tions. Interested reader can also refer to Temiz et al. (2025) for a 
recent review on stochastic location-routing problems, addressing both 
humanitarian and other application areas.
Most studies on the Stochastic Location-Routing Problem in humani-
tarian operations involves selection of pre-defined routes in the second-
stage, rather than explicit routing. Ukkusuri and Yushimito (2008) ad-
dress a location-routing problem with inventory pre-positioning under 
route failures, selecting reliable routes based on failure probabilities, 
and using the set of reliable routes to make location decisions. Mete 
and Zabinsky (2010) study depot location with pre-positioning to serve 
hospitals in case of a disaster, using a two-stage stochastic program to 
handle demand and travel time uncertainties. Bozorgi-Amiri and Khorsi 
(2016) define a multi-period multi-objective problem with demand, 
travel time and cost uncertainties. Aslan and Çelik (2019) consider 
another version of the Stochastic Location-Routing Problem with pre-
positioning under a latency-based objective in the second-stage, solving 
the problem to optimality using valid inequalities. Chang et al. (2017) 
formulate a robust optimisation model for a variant of the problem with 
demand and travel speed uncertainty. Although this study explicitly 
considers construction of tours, it does so only for the worst-case 
scenario. In a different vein, Ahmadi et al. (2015) incorporate route 
construction into the first-stage decisions considering the road fail-
ures and inflated travel times (via decreased travel speed), while the 
second-stage calculates constraint violations for relief times for each 
scenario.
Although the use of pre-defined routes increases the tractability of 
the resulting Stochastic Location-Routing Problem, it also decreases 
the effectiveness of relief transportation by limiting the potential set 
of routes that can be used. Only a limited number of studies in the 
literature for the Stochastic Location-Routing Problem in humanitarian 
operations explicitly construct routes after uncertainty realisations. 
Among these, Caunhye et al. (2016) address pre-positioning and rout-
ing of emergency supplies under demand and travel time uncertainties, 
and use robust optimisation by minimising the cost of setting up 
depots and the worst-case results among damage scenarios. Sabouhi 
et al. (2021) also construct the routes in the second-stage considering 
demand uncertainty and road failure. Zhong et al. (2020) consider 
demand uncertainty and decision maker’s risk attitude. They implement 
a genetic algorithm for the resulting bi-objective problem, using cost 
and the summation of arrival times at demand nodes as objectives.
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
3 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
2.4. Contributions of this study
The work in this paper makes important contributions to the metho-
dology by means of a novel modelling and solution approach. It also 
contributes to the practice through the managerial insights it drives 
through the computational experiments.
From a methodological perspective, this study introduces a novel 
mathematical formulation for a stochastic location-routing problem 
with multiple vehicle types, latency-based objectives, and a sparse net-
work lacking triangle inequality. These problem characteristics deem 
impossible the use of classical decision variable definitions and subtour 
elimination constraints typically used in the location-routing literature. 
To address this, we propose a flow-based formulation that accom-
modates multiple visits to nodes and develop a new set of subtour 
elimination constraints tailored for this structure. Moreover, we de-
sign a variable neighbourhood search (VNS) metaheuristic that jointly 
makes depot location and routing decisions across scenarios. Unlike 
prior work, our approach determines scenario-specific routes directly, 
without relying on adjustments of a single scenario-independent route. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such application of VNS 
in this context.
On the practical side, the study offers insights into the design of 
post-disaster relief logistics using mixed fleets of trucks and drones 
under uncertainty. Our results demonstrate the value of integrating 
these vehicle types, highlight the importance of scenario-dependent 
planning over static or rule-based strategies, and quantify the opera-
tional impact of needs assessment. The findings also inform policy and 
design decisions by identifying feasible ranges for drone endurance and 
speed, thereby supporting the effective deployment of hybrid delivery 
systems in humanitarian settings.
3. Problem definition and mathematical model
We start this section by describing the problem environment, fol-
lowed by our assumptions that result in the definition of a stochastic 
location-routing problem with parallel truck and drone deliveries and 
travel time uncertainties. In the last part of this section, we provide a 
two-stage stochastic mixed integer programming formulation for this 
problem.
3.1. Problem description
The problem at hand considers the decision of designing a relief 
distribution network in preparation for a large-scale disaster. Prior 
to the disaster, local authorities (e.g., municipalities) or federal/na-
tional agencies make the decisions on where to locate humanitarian 
depots equipped with parking stations, charging areas, and landing 
pads, to serve as hubs for the emergency vehicles (trucks and drones). 
These depots also serve as storage areas for relief items, which are 
generally pre-positioned before the disaster. Rather than building a 
new facility, opening a depot generally implies converting an existing 
public or private building, such as schools, town halls, sports halls, or 
warehouses (Aslan & Çelik, 2019). The decision of opening depots is 
generally subject to a fixed budget.
Our focus is on disasters where beneficiaries are located in smaller 
residential areas such as rural villages or districts. Demand of relief 
items is served in central areas of demand locations, such as town 
centres, and emergency assembly points such as schools and community 
centres. Relief items are single commodities or bundles, which may 
include medical supplies (first aid supplies, personal protective equip-
ment), weather protection (emergency foil blankets, rain ponchos), or 
communication equipment (battery chargers, flashlights) (Noyan et al., 
2016). In general, post-disaster demand amounts of such items are 
known a priori, as such quantities are proportional to the population 
of each demand location.
In the aftermath of a disaster, damaged infrastructure leads to 
blocked roads or longer traversal time on some of the road segments. 
As the structural impact of the potential disaster on the road network 
is uncertain, pre-disaster network design decisions need to be made 
with this uncertainty in mind. The potential effects of different disaster 
scenarios can be estimated using structural engineering models, such 
as HAZUS in the US (FEMA, 2022). Once the disaster hits, damage 
assessment on the ground transportation network is performed by 
a central decision maker to manage and coordinate timely search-
and-rescue operations and humanitarian aid delivery. Geographical 
information systems, when integrated with satellite imagery, higher 
resolution drone images, and crowd-sourced data, can provide the road 
infrastructure condition in the aftermath.
Post-disaster routing of drones and trucks, as well as decisions on 
relief item distribution are carried out by a central authority, such as 
FEMA in the US and AFAD in Turkiye. These entities also coordinate the 
disaster response between local authorities, NGOs, and private parties. 
The aim of the central decision maker is to provide a timely delivery 
of relief items to all beneficiaries by means of an effective routing and 
scheduling of vehicles.
3.2. Modelling assumptions
For the sake of simplicity, we assume that the central decision-
maker locates a pre-determined number of depots. The existence of 
a fixed budget (instead of a fixed number of depots) can be easily 
incorporated into our approach. We also assume that candidate depot 
locations coincide with those of demand locations. For simplicity, each 
open depot is assigned a single truck and a single drone. As in Murray 
and Chu (2015), trucks make a single tour from the depot, while drones 
can make multiple take-offs, with a single delivery each take-off. Truck 
and drone operations are in parallel; with trucks following a sequence 
of demand points in a route and drones conducting separate deliveries 
directly from the depot. We also assume a drone cannot visit more 
than one location per take-off due to operational constraints. Without 
loss of generality, we assume negligible waiting times for activities 
such as battery swapping and package loading. If needed, these can 
be incorporated into the travel times.
We consider a set of relief supplies whose demand at each location 
can be satisfied by a single delivery trip from either a truck or a drone. 
Examples of such commodities include the lightweight first-aid and 
sustenance packages of IFRC which weigh between 3–10 kilogrammes 
and can provide a sustenance package for a small to medium-sized 
villages (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Soci-
eties, 2018) and Interagency Emergency Health Kits of UNICEF, which 
provide medical kits for up to 100 children, and weighs less than 10 
kilogrammes (UNICEF, 2025). These are small enough to be carried in 
a single trip to each demand location (e.g., Wingcopter GmbH, 2022; 
Zipline, 2023), and thus payload is not a concern.
Drones have many operational limitations, including performance 
in bad weather, payload capacity, battery duration, motion restrictions, 
etc. In line with previous studies (e.g., Agatz et al., 2018; Carlsson & 
Song, 2018; Murray & Chu, 2015), we incorporate only endurance as 
an explicit drone limitation in our model. Other operational limitations 
are excluded for three main reasons. First, payload is not a binding 
factor due to the size of relief commodities. Second, some factors 
such as weather-related performance or motion restrictions are harder 
to estimate in advance. Lastly, our model addresses a strategic-level 
problem, and the effects of such factors can be implicitly captured by 
calibrating the endurance parameter. We also assume constant drone 
performance throughout its flight such that the flight duration between 
a depot and a demand location is symmetric.
In the literature, road network disruptions are modelled in two 
alternative ways. Binary disruptions (e.g., Canbilen Sütiçen et al. 2023, 
Sabouhi et al. 2021, Salman and Yücel 2015) assume that once a road 
segment is disrupted, it is not traversable at all. Inflated travel times 
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
4 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Table 1
Notation used in the two-stage stochastic mixed integer programming model
 Index Sets
 𝑁 Nodes (except the sink node)  
 𝑠 Sink node  
 𝑁 ′ All nodes including the sink node  
 𝐸 Edges (excluding those incident to the sink node)  
 𝐸′ All edges including those incident to the sink node  
 𝑊 Candidate depot nodes  
 𝐷 Demand nodes  
 𝑊𝑖 Candidate depot nodes within the endurance limit for a return trip to the demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷  
 𝐷𝑘 Demand nodes within the endurance limit for a return trip from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 , sorted in non-decreasing order of drone travel time to the depot  
 𝑖𝑚 Node index of the 𝑚th demand node in the ordered list 𝐷𝑘  
 𝛺 Disaster scenarios  
 Deterministic Parameters
 𝑣𝑖𝑘 Round trip flight time of drone originating from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 to demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷  
 𝑛 Number of depots to be opened  
 Stochastic Parameters
 𝑡𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) Truck travel time on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
 First Stage Decision Variables
 𝑥𝑘 =
{
1, if a depot is located at candidate depot node 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊
0, otherwise
 
 Second Stage Decision Variables
 𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) =
{
1, if a truck travels on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 on a route originating from a depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺
0, otherwise
 
 𝑐𝑖𝑘(𝜉) =
{
1, if demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 is assigned to a truck originating from a depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺
0, otherwise
 
 𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
1, if a truck leaves demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 for the first time and travels on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 on a route originating from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 under realisation 
𝜉 ∈ 𝛺
0, otherwise
 
 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
1, if a truck leaves demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 for the last time and travels on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 on a route originating from depot node 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 under 
realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺
0, otherwise
 
 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
1, if a truck travels on edge (𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸 right after edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, and if it does not leave demand node 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷 for the first time and flow amount 
on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 is equal to the flow amount of edge (𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺
0, otherwise
 
 𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉) =
{
1, if a drone visits demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 from depot node 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊𝑖 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺
0, otherwise
 
 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) Commodity flow on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸′ under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
 𝑝𝑖(𝜉) Drone arrival time at demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
 𝜙𝑖(𝜉) Maximum flow into demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
 𝜓𝑖(𝜉) Minimum flow into demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
 𝜎𝑖(𝜉) Minimum flow out of demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
 𝑢𝑖𝑘(𝜉) Number of times demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 is visited by truck originating from depot node 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
 ℎ𝑖𝑘(𝜉) Number of times demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 is visited after the first visit by truck originating from depot node 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 under realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺  
(e.g., Caunhye et al. 2016, Hsueh et al. 2008, Mete and Zabinsky 2010), 
on the other hand, imply an increase in the time required to traverse a 
road segment, should it be disrupted. In this paper, we take the latter 
approach and make use of a set of discrete disaster scenarios. In each 
scenario, we consider different travel times due to the effects of the 
disaster on each road segment.
3.3. A two-stage stochastic mixed integer programming model
We formulate the problem as a two-stage stochastic mixed integer 
program with an objective of minimising the expected average arrival 
time for timely delivery. The first-stage decisions involve the locations 
of depots and the second-stage decisions relate to the routing of trucks 
and sequencing of drone visits. We list relevant notation in Table  1.
We model the problem on an undirected graph 𝐺 = ( 𝑁, 𝐸 ) where 
vertices in 𝑁 are demand locations (denoted by set 𝐷), and candidate 
depot locations (represented by set 𝑊 ). Edges in 𝐸 correspond to direct 
road connections between any two locations in 𝑁. The pre-determined 
number of depots to open is denoted by 𝑛 and decision variables 𝑥𝑘
indicate whether a candidate location 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  is deployed as a depot.
To minimise the average arrival time of a drone from a depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊
to a given set of demand nodes, the visiting order should follow the 
non-decreasing order of the drone’s round trip flight time to demand 
nodes (Blazewicz et al., 2019). The set 𝐷𝑘 denotes the ordered list of 
demand nodes that a drone can visit and return to the candidate depot 
𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  within its endurance, arranged in non-decreasing order of travel 
times. We define the set 𝑊𝑖 as the depots 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  that are within the 
endurance limit for a return trip to the demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷.
We model uncertainty in travel times on the road network using 
discrete scenarios 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺. In this context, the stochastic parameters 𝑡𝑖𝑗 (𝜉)
specify the truck travel time on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 for each scenario 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺. 
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
5 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
The decision variables 𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) denote whether the truck departing from 
a depot node 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  travels on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, under scenario 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺. 
Each demand node is assigned to a truck or drone dispatched from a 
depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  under scenario 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺, indicated by decision variables 
𝑐𝑖𝑘(𝜉) and 𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉), respectively. Drone arrival time at demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷
under scenario 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺 is given by 𝑝𝑖(𝜉).
We use a commodity flow formulation to model multiple truck visits 
to demand nodes in a non-complete network (Letchford et al., 2013). 
To do so, we add a dummy sink node 𝑠 to the node set to obtain the 
augmented set 𝑁 ′, and create dummy edges connecting all demand 
nodes to 𝑠 to form the expanded edge set 𝐸′. The commodity flow 
variable 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) carries demand units on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸′ to satisfy the 
remaining demands on the truck tour under scenario 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺. The truck 
delivers one unit in each first visit to a demand node, as well as one 
unit of flow to 𝑠. From a modelling perspective, flow starts from an 
open depot and after demand nodes are visited, and concludes at the 
sink node. However, it is important to note that the return of the truck 
to the depot is not a concern, as the objective function minimises the 
expected average arrival time to demand nodes. Although tours could 
be modelled to terminate at the depots and this would still be valid, 
it would require constructing the return path, which could result in 
unnecessarily lengthy tours. Therefore, using a single dummy node to 
terminate all truck tours is a modelling choice made for simplification 
purposes.
We exemplify the expansion of the network and values of commod-
ity flow variables on a simple network in Fig.  1, where Fig.  1(a) shows 
the original network and Fig.  1(b) depicts the expanded network and 
an example truck tour that follows the route 1-2-3-2-4-𝑠. Commodity 
flow amounts are provided for each corresponding flow variable. The 
initial flow amount, 𝑓1,2(𝜉), is set to 4, reflecting the total needs of 
three demand nodes and a sink node. Flow amounts decrease by one 
unit on the first visits. However, when Node 2 is visited a second time, 
the incoming and the outgoing flow amounts become equal, such that 
𝑓3,2(𝜉) = 𝑓2,4(𝜉) = 2 .
The definition of commodity flow variables also allows us to cal-
culate the average arrival time to nodes visited by trucks. Using same 
route on Fig.  1(a), the arrival times at nodes 2, 3, and 4 are calculated 
as 𝑡1,2(𝜉), 𝑡1,2(𝜉) +𝑡2,3(𝜉), and 𝑡1,2(𝜉) +𝑡2,3(𝜉) +𝑡3,2(𝜉) +𝑡2,4(𝜉), respectively. 
This yields the summation of arrival times as 3𝑡1,2(𝜉) + 2𝑡2,3(𝜉) + 𝑡3,2(𝜉) +
𝑡2,4(𝜉), which is equivalent to 𝑓1,2(𝜉)𝑡1,2(𝜉) + 𝑓2,3(𝜉)𝑡2,3(𝜉) + 𝑓3,2(𝜉)𝑡3,2(𝜉) +
𝑓2,4(𝜉)𝑡2,4(𝜉) − [𝑡1,2(𝜉) + 𝑡2,3(𝜉) + 𝑡3,2(𝜉) + 𝑡2,4(𝜉)]. More generally, the total 
arrival time to truck-visited nodes can be written as:
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐸
𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉)𝑡𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐸
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉)𝑡𝑖𝑗 (𝜉).
We define additional decision variables to ensure the commodity 
flows follow the aforementioned structure. Binary decision variables 
𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) indicate the truck’s first departure from node 𝑖 when it travels on 
edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸. Decision variables 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) mark the last departure of the 
truck from node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 in the same way. Binary decision variables 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉)
indicate whether the truck’s traversal of edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 is immediately 
followed by that of edge (𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸 and this is not the truck’s first 
departure from node 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷. The number of times a demand node 
𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 is visited by a truck from a depot node 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  is denoted 
by 𝑢𝑖𝑘(𝜉) and the number of additional visits to a demand node after 
its demand is satisfied is indicated by ℎ𝑖𝑘(𝜉). For example, Node 3 in 
Fig.  1(b) is visited once, so the first and the last departures happen 
on the same edge, leading to 𝑤3,2,1(𝜉) = 𝑎3,2,1(𝜉) = 1 . However, Node 
2 is visited twice with first and last departures occurring on different 
edges, resulting in 𝑤2,3,1(𝜉) = 𝑎2,4,1(𝜉) = 1 . Since only Node 2 is visited 
more than once, the only decision variable 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) that takes a positive 
value is 𝑏3,2,4(𝜉) = 1 , indicating the immediate route 3-2-4 on the second 
departure from Node 2. Furthermore, Nodes 3 and 4 are visited once, 
hence 𝑢3,1(𝜉) = 𝑢4,1(𝜉) = 1 , whereas ℎ3,1(𝜉) = ℎ4,1(𝜉) = 0 . Similarly, 
𝑢2,1(𝜉) = 2 and ℎ2,1(𝜉) = 1 as Node 2 is visited twice.
We also denote the decision variables representing the maximum 
flow into, minimum flow into, and minimum flow out of demand node 
𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 by 𝜙𝑖(𝜉), 𝜓𝑖(𝜉), and 𝜎𝑖(𝜉), respectively. These decision variables 
are required to assign the commodity flow amounts on edges to ensure 
that the minimum flow out of a demand node happens at the time of 
the last departure from that node and one unit of maximum incoming 
flow into a node is left after the first departure from that node.
Based on the described sets, parameters and decision variables, we 
formulate the problem as a two-stage stochastic mixed integer program 
as follows: 
min 𝐸𝜉|𝑥[𝑔(𝜉)] (1)
s.t.
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑥𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 (2)
𝑥𝑘 ∈ {0, 1} ∀ 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (3)
where 𝑔(𝜉) is the optimal solution to the following second-stage model:
min
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐸 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉)𝑡𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) − ∑
𝑘∈𝑊
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐸 𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉)𝑡𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) + ∑
𝑖∈𝐷 𝑝𝑖(𝜉)
|𝐷| (4)
s.t. 𝑝𝑖𝑚 (𝜉) ≥
∑
𝑗<𝑚
𝑧𝑖𝑗 𝑘(𝜉)𝑣𝑖𝑗 𝑘
+
𝑧𝑖𝑚𝑘(𝜉)𝑣𝑖𝑚𝑘
2 − 𝑀(1 − 𝑧𝑖𝑚𝑘(𝜉)) ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 , ∀𝑖𝑚 ∈ 𝐷𝑘 (5)
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑐𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) +
∑
𝑘∈𝑊𝑗
𝑧𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) = 1 ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷 (6)
∑
𝑖∈𝑁
𝑖≠𝑗
(𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) + 𝑦𝑗𝑖𝑘 (𝜉)) ≤ 2|𝐷|𝑐𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (7)
𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ≤ 𝑥𝑘 ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊𝑖 (8)
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ≤ 𝑥𝑘 ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (9)
∑
𝑖∈𝐷
𝑖≠𝑘
𝑦𝑘𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ≤ 𝑥𝑘 ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (10)
∑
𝑗∈𝑊
𝑗≠𝑘
∑
𝑖∈𝑁
𝑖≠𝑘
𝑦𝑘𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) = 0 ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (11)
∑
𝑗∈𝑁
𝑗≠𝑖
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) =
∑
𝑗∈𝑁
𝑗≠𝑖
𝑦𝑗𝑖𝑘 (𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑁, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (12)
∑
𝑗∈𝑁
𝑗≠𝑖
𝑦𝑗𝑖𝑘 (𝜉) = 𝑢𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (13)
ℎ𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ≥ 𝑢𝑖𝑘(𝜉) − 1 ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (14)
∑
𝑖∈𝑁
𝑖≠𝑘
𝑓𝑘𝑖(𝜉) =
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐸
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) −
∑
𝑖∈𝐷
ℎ𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (15)
∑
𝑗∈𝑁
𝑗≠𝑖
𝑓𝑗𝑖 (𝜉) −
∑
𝑗∈𝑁 ′
𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) = 1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (16)
∑
𝑖∈𝑁
𝑓𝑖𝑠(𝜉) =
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑥𝑘 (17)
𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) ≤ (|𝐷| + 1)
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 (18)
𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) ≥ 𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊
(19)
𝑓𝑖𝑠(𝜉) ≤
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑘≠𝑖
𝑦𝑖𝑘𝑘(𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 (20)
𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ≤ 𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊
(21)
𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ≤ 𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊
(22)
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
6 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Fig. 1. Illustrative example for expansion of the network and values of commodity flow variables.
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
∑
𝑗∈𝑁
𝑗≠𝑖
𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) = 1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (23)
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
∑
𝑗∈𝑁
𝑗≠𝑖
𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) = 1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (24)
𝜎𝑖(𝜉) ≥ 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉)
− (|𝐷| + 1)(1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉)) ∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 (25)
𝜎𝑖(𝜉) ≥ 𝑓𝑖𝑠(𝜉)
− (|𝐷| + 1)(1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑎𝑖𝑘𝑘(𝜉)) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (26)
𝜙𝑖(𝜉) ≥ 𝑓𝑗𝑖 (𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 (27)
𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) ≥ 𝜙𝑖(𝜉) − 1
− (|𝐷| + 1)(1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉)) ∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 (28)
𝑓𝑖𝑠(𝜉) ≥ 𝜙𝑖(𝜉) − 1
− (|𝐷| + 1)(1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑤𝑖𝑘𝑘(𝜉)) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (29)
𝜓𝑖(𝜉) ≤ 𝑓𝑗𝑖 (𝜉)
+ (|𝐷| + 1)(1 −
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑦𝑗𝑖𝑘 (𝜉)) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 (30)
𝜎𝑖(𝜉) ≤ 𝜓𝑖(𝜉) ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (31)
∑
𝑖∈𝑁
𝑖≠𝑗
𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) ≤
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑦𝑗𝑙𝑘 (𝜉) ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 (32)
∑
𝑙∈𝑁
𝑙≠𝑗
𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) ≤
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 (33)
∑
𝑖∈𝑁
𝑖≠𝑗
𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) ≥
∑
𝑘∈𝑊
(𝑦𝑗𝑙𝑘 (𝜉) − 𝑤𝑗𝑙𝑘 (𝜉)) ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸 (34)
𝑓𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) ≥ 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) − (|𝐷| + 1)(1 − 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉)) ∀𝑗, 𝑙 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗), (𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸
(35)
𝑓𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) ≤ 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) + (|𝐷| + 1)(1 − 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉)) ∀𝑗, 𝑙 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗), (𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸
(36)
𝑓𝑗𝑠 (𝜉) ≥ 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) − (|𝐷| + 1)(1 − 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉)) ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊
(37)
𝑓𝑗𝑠 (𝜉) ≤ 𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) + (|𝐷| + 1)(1 − 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉)) ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊
(38)
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉), 𝑤 𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉), 𝑎 𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) ∈ {0 , 1} ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (39)
𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) ∈ {0 , 1} ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, ∀(𝑖, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸 (40)
𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ∈ {0 , 1} ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊𝑖 (41)
𝑓𝑖𝑗 (𝜉) ≥ 0 ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸′ (42)
𝑝𝑖(𝜉), 𝜙 𝑖(𝜉), 𝜓 𝑖(𝜉), 𝜎 𝑖(𝜉) ≥ 0 ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (43)
𝑢𝑖𝑘(𝜉), ℎ 𝑖𝑘(𝜉) ≥ 0 ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 (44)
The objective function (1) minimises the expected objective value 
of the second stage problem. Constraint (2) ensures that at most 𝑛
depots are opened. Constraints (3) define the domain of the first stage 
variables. Given the first stage decisions, the second stage problem 
objective (4) minimises the average arrival time to demand nodes under 
the realisation 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺. The first two terms in the numerator of function 
(4) calculate the total arrival time at nodes visited by trucks, while the 
final part of the numerator of function (4) sums the arrival times at 
nodes visited by drones. The total arrival time to all demand nodes is 
then divided by the number of demand nodes to obtain the average 
arrival time.
Constraints (5) are employed to calculate the arrival time at each 
demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 visited by a drone, denoted by 𝑝𝑖(𝜉). As each drone 
is assumed to make a single delivery per trip and return to the depot 
before the next launch, the first part of the constraint sums the round-
trip flight times to all nodes preceding 𝑖 in 𝐷𝑘, i.e., demand nodes 𝑗 for 
which the round trip from depot 𝑘 is no longer than that to 𝑖 that are 
visited from this depot. The second part of the constraint then adds the 
one-way flight time from the depot to node 𝑖, representing the moment 
the drone reaches the node.
Constraints (6) guarantee that each demand node is assigned either 
to a drone or a truck. Constraints (7) maintain route consistency by 
ensuring that a demand node 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷 is included in the truck tour 
originating from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  only if it is assigned to that truck. 
Constraints (8) limit drone flights to demand nodes from open depots 
that satisfy the endurance limit. However, the endurance limit is en-
forced for all drone trips through the domain of the decision variable 
𝑧𝑖𝑘(𝜉), as defined in Constraints (41). The variable domain utilises the 
set 𝑊𝑖 to specify the depots from which a drone can make a return 
trip to visit demand node 𝑖 within the endurance limit. Thus, by the 
variable definition, only endurance-feasible drone trips are permitted 
in the model.
Constraints (9) ensure that a truck can only travel on edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈
𝐸 on a route originating from an open depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 . Meanwhile, 
constraints (10) ensure that only one truck can leave an open depot. 
Route consistency is maintained through constraints (11), which ensure 
that a truck tour starting from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  does not originate 
from another depot. Constraints (12) focus on truck flow balance such 
that for each node, the number of incoming and outgoing truck flows 
are equal. Constraints (13) calculate the values of the 𝑢𝑖𝑘 variables. 
By subtracting one unit from each 𝑢𝑖𝑘 decision variable, constraints 
(14) provide a lower bound for decision variables ℎ𝑖𝑘, the number of 
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
7 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
additional visits a truck made to a demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 after its first 
visit.
Constraints (15) to (38) are commodity flow constraints. Constraints 
(15) ensure that the outgoing commodity flow from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  is 
equal to the number of demand nodes the truck is scheduled to visit, 
plus an additional unit accounting for the sink node. If a demand node 
𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 is not visited by any drone, as indicated by the summation on the 
right-hand side of the constraint, it must be on a truck tour. Constraint 
(16) then ensures that one unit of flow is subtracted from the route after 
leaving node 𝑖. Thus, constraint (17) makes sure that the incoming flow 
amounts to the sink node equal to the number of open depots. By doing 
so, constraints (17) force trucks to make a tour from an open depot. 
Constraints (18) specify that if a truck does not traverse an edge, the 
associated commodity flow cannot be positive. Conversely, commodity 
flows must be positive when a truck traverses an arc, dictated by 
constraints (19). Constraints (20) link the commodity flow from node 
𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 to the sink node with the return of a truck from node 𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 to 
a depot, synchronising the movement of both trucks and commodities. 
Constraints (21) and (22) prohibit decision variables 𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) and 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉)
from taking positive values if the truck from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  does not 
traverse the edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸. Constraints (23) and (24) guarantee that if 
a demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 is not assigned to any drone, it must be visited 
by a truck. In that case, exactly one of the 𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) variables and exactly 
one of the 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) variables takes a positive value.
Constraints (25) and (26) define the minimum commodity flow 
outgoing from node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 by utilising the 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 (𝜉) variables. These 
constraints stipulate that the minimum flow happens at the time of the 
last departure from that node. In Fig.  1(b), Node 2 is visited twice and 
the outgoing flow amounts from that node are three and two as seen 
on the network. Decision variable 𝑎2,4,1(𝜉) = 1  indicates that the latest 
departure from Node 2 is on the edge (2, 4), therefore, the minimum 
outgoing flow from Node 2 is bounded by the flow amount on the 
edge (2, 4). Constraints (27) assign the maximum flow into node 𝑖. 
Referring to the same example in Fig.  1(a), the maximum flow into 
Node 2 is set four as the incoming flow amounts are four and two. By 
using maximum flow into node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, constraints (28) and (29) ensure 
that at the time of the first departure from node 𝑖, one unit is left at 
the node. On the illustrative example, outgoing flow amount after the 
initial visit to Node 2 becomes three on edge (2, 3) as 𝑤2,3,1 embarks 
the first departure from that node. Constraints (30) put an upper limit 
to 𝜓𝑖(𝜉) variables representing the minimum flow into node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷. On 
the same example, minimum flow into Node 2 is bounded by two as 
the incoming flows are four and two. Constraints (31) ensure that for 
each demand node 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, the minimum flow outgoing from the node 
is less than or equal to the minimum flow incoming to it.
We prohibit the 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) variables from taking positive values unless 
the truck traverses these edges by constraints (32) and (33). Further-
more, if edge (𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸 is traversed and this traversal is not the 
truck’s first departure from node 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷, constraints (34) ensure that 
𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) variables must take positive values. On the illustrative example, 
since traversing the edge (2, 4) is not the first departure from Node 2, 
𝑤2,4,1 = 0 and 𝑏3,2,4 is forced to take value 1. Finally, constraints (35) 
to (38) guarantee that if 𝑏𝑖𝑗𝑙 (𝜉) variables take positive value, flow on 
edge (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 is equal to the flow on the edge (𝑗, 𝑙) ∈ 𝐸. In the 
example network, 𝑏3,2,4 = 1  shows the immediate tour marking the 
second departure from Node 2. Thus, the flow amounts on those edges 
set equal 𝑓3,2 = 𝑓2,4 = 2.
Constraints (39)–(44) define the domains of the decision variables.
4. A variable neighbourhood search heuristic
The problem defined in Section 3 can be easily shown to be  -
hard, as the deterministic version with no drones and no location 
decisions is equivalent to the  -hard multi-depot 𝑚-TSP (e.g., Oberlin 
et al. 2009). Furthermore, it will become apparent in Section 5 that 
even very small instances of the problem cannot be solved to opti-
mality by commercial solvers. Consequently, we propose a heuristic 
approach based on variable neighbourhood search to solve practical-
sized instances of the problem, which is explained in detail in this 
section.
4.1. Overview of the heuristic algorithm
Our proposed heuristic approach consists of two phases. In the first 
phase, we perform a local search for depot selection. Subsequently, the 
second phase evaluates open depot sets identified in the local search by 
constructing the truck routes and drone schedules. This phase consists 
of the initial tour construction and variable neighbourhood search-
based improvement steps. Additional notation defined for the heuristic 
algorithm is provided in Table  2.
Algorithm 1 summarises our overall approach, which starts with a 
random open depot set. Here, 𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡 defines a swap neighbourhood, 
where we close one of the open depots and open one that is currently 
closed. We evaluate all neighbouring open depot sets (in lines 6 to 11) 
and we move to the set that yields the best-expected latency. Each 
new set of open depots is evaluated in the second phase, which is 
summarised in the next section.
Algorithm 1 Overview of the heuristic algorithm
Function StochasticLocationRouting(𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡 , 𝛺, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥)
1: Initialise 𝑋 randomly
2: 𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛 ← 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑋, 𝛺, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥)
3: 𝑓𝑛𝑒𝑤 ← 𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛
4: 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔 ← 0
5: while 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔 = 0 do
6:  for all 𝑌 ∈ 𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡 (𝑋) do 
7:  if 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑌 , 𝛺, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥) < 𝑓 𝑛𝑒𝑤 then
8:  𝑋′ ← 𝑌
9:  𝑓𝑛𝑒𝑤 ← 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑌 , 𝛺, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥)
10:  end if
11:  end for
12:  if 𝑓𝑛𝑒𝑤 = 𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛 then
13:  𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔 ← 1
14:  else
15:  𝑋 ← 𝑋′
16:  𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛 ← 𝑓𝑛𝑒𝑤
17:  end if
18: end while ⊳ Until no improving set of open depots is found
return 𝑋′
4.2. Depot evaluation heuristic
The second phase of the algorithm is given in Algorithm 2. For 
a given open depot set, this phase constructs the truck tours and 
drone schedules for each distinct scenario and calculates the expected 
objective over all scenarios.
Algorithm 2 Depot evaluation heuristic
Function DepotEvaluation(𝑋, 𝛺, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥)
1: for all 𝜉 in 𝛺 do
2:  𝑅(𝑋, 𝜉) ← 𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑋, 𝜉)
3:  𝑅(𝑋, 𝜉) ← 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝑅(𝑋, 𝜉), 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥)
4: end for
return 𝑓 (𝑋) ← 𝐸𝜉|𝑋 [ℎ(𝑅(𝑋, 𝜉))] ⊳ Expected summation of arrival times
Under a specific scenario, the procedure involves two key stages: 
initial construction and subsequent improvement. Initial construction 
finds preliminary truck tours and drone schedules, which may not be 
immediately feasible, with an anticipation of reaching feasible routes 
during the improvement steps.
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
8 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Table 2
Additional notation used for the heuristic.
 Index Sets
 𝑋 Open depots  
 𝑈𝑘 Unvisited demand nodes assigned to depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  
 𝑇 𝑇𝑘 Demand nodes in order of truck visit starting from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  
 𝐷𝐿𝑘 Demand nodes assigned to a drone dispatched from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  
 𝐷𝑆𝑘 Demand nodes in order of drone visit starting from depot 𝑘 ∈ 𝑊  
 Algorithm Parameters
 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥 Number of neighbourhoods defined for the shake step  
 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥 Number of neighbourhoods defined for the local search  
 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥 Maximum number of iterations  
 Evaluation Functions
 ℎ(𝑅(𝑋, 𝜉)) Evaluation of routes under depot set 𝑋 and scenario 𝜉 ∈ 𝛺, i.e., sum of arrival times 
at all demand nodes given the scenario and open depots
 
Fig. 2. Illustrative example for truck backtracking.
4.2.1. Route construction by a greedy heuristic approach
Algorithm 3 provides the initial construction process. It starts by 
assigning demand nodes to the closest open depot based on direct 
geodesic distance. For each open depot, we construct a truck tour by 
modifying the nearest neighbour heuristic for the Travelling Salesman 
Problem. The initial construction heuristic aims to construct a truck 
tour to visit all allocated demand nodes with minimum backtracking, 
assuming no drone is available. It adds the nearest assigned unvisited 
node to the truck tour according to the truck travel times of the scenario 
under consideration. The process involves continuously inserting the 
closest unvisited nodes (lines 17 to 20).
If there is no direct road link to an unvisited node (checked in 
lines 10 to 16), the truck backtracks to a previously visited node to 
explore alternative ways to visit the remaining nodes (in lines 21 to 
44). However, a truck can face a dead-end and may not find a backtrack 
node to return to in the initial tour construction step. In that case, we 
assign the remaining unvisited demand nodes to the drone of the same 
depot (in lines 38 to 41).
After a backtrack node is found, instead of retracing the exact 
truck tour, the shortest backtracking route is used. We illustrate the 
backtracking of a truck on a small network in Fig.  2. Consider the 
current truck tour 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 3 → 5 → 6, shown in solid arrows. 
The only unvisited node is 7, which does not share an edge with the 
current node, 6. By progressively evaluating each node on the current 
tour backward, node 2 is found as the point of backtrack because it 
shares an edge with the unvisited node 7. Following Algorithm 4, we 
find the backtracking route. Step 1 extracts the partial tour as 2 → 3 →
4 → 3 → 5. Step 2 simplifies the partial tour by removing the redundant 
visits, resulting in 2 → 3 → 5. Step 3 progressively seeks a shared edge 
between the current node and a node on the simplified tour. There is no 
edge between node 2 and node 6, but there is one between node 3 and 
node 6. Thus, from the current node 6 to node 3, the truck backtracks 
to node 2 and visits node 7. As a result, the final truck tour becomes 
1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 3 → 5 → 6 → 3 → 2 → 7.
4.2.2. Route improvement by variable neighbourhood search
When the initial truck tours and drone schedules are determined, 
we make use of a variable neighbourhood search (VNS) heuristic to 
improve the truck and drone routes. Algorithm 5 summarises our VNS 
procedure, which is run for a total of 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥 iterations. Throughout the 
VNS, we use the following neighbourhood structures, which refer to 
the set of all possible solutions that can be obtained by the given move 
applied on a current solution 𝑟:
𝑁1(𝑟): truck to truck reassignment. Move a demand node from a truck 
tour to a different truck tour.
𝑁2(𝑟): truck to drone reassignment — same depot. Remove a demand 
node from a truck tour and assign it to the drone dispatched from the 
same depot.
𝑁3(𝑟): truck to drone reassignment — different depot. Remove a de-
mand node from a truck tour and assign it to a drone dispatched from 
a different depot.
𝑁4(𝑟): drone to truck reassignment — same depot. Reassign a drone-
visited demand node to a truck tour originating from the same depot.
𝑁5(𝑟): drone to truck reassignment — different depot. Reassign a 
drone-visited demand node to a truck tour originating from a different 
depot.
𝑁6(𝑟): drone to drone reassignment. Reassign a drone-visited demand 
node to a different drone.
𝑁7(𝑟): complete reconstruction of a truck tour. Randomly select a truck 
and reconstruct its route by changing its initially visited demand node. 
Any demand node on the previous truck tour are assigned to the closest 
drone.
Each iteration of the algorithm starts with a shake move, where 
we randomly select a neighbouring solution from the current solution 
(in lines 5 to 6). Then, local search is performed from that solution 
(in lines 8 to 19). If the local search results in a better solution, we 
update the current solution and set the first neighbourhood for shaking. 
If however, local search does not provide a better solution, the next 
neighbourhood is set for shaking (in lines 20 to 25). This process 
continues until all shake neighbourhoods are implemented.
In the local search, we use a best improvement approach. This pro-
cess is repeated for each neighbourhood until no further improvements 
can be achieved with the same neighbourhood structure (in lines 9 to 
12). If no improving solution is obtained from a particular neighbouring 
structure, we move to the next neighbourhood. If, however, we obtain 
an improving solution, we return to the first neighbourhood structure 
(in lines 13 to 18). Neighbouring solutions are explored in order of 
the above list as preliminary results suggest that no particular order 
of neighbourhoods consistently outperforms others.
We use the same neighbourhood structures for both steps, with 
the exception of 𝑁7, which is only used in shaking. In the set of 
neighbouring solutions, we consider all feasible neighbouring routes 
and infeasible ones violating the drone flight duration. Infeasible drone 
assignments are included in the search with a large dummy flight 
duration to make them undesirable.
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
9 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Algorithm 3 Initial truck tour and drone schedule construction 
heuristic
Function InitialConstruction(𝑋, 𝜉)
1: 𝑈𝑘, 𝑇 𝑇𝑘, 𝐷𝐿𝑘, 𝐷𝑆𝑘 ← {}
2: for all 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 do
3:  Set 𝑘 as the closest open depot to demand node 𝑖
4:  𝑈𝑘 ← 𝑈𝑘 ∪ {𝑖} ⊳ Assign node to unvisited nodes list of depot
5: end for
6: for all 𝑘 ∈ 𝑋 do
7:  𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ← 𝑘 ⊳  Assign depot as current node
8:  𝑇 𝑇𝑘 ← 𝑇 𝑇𝑘 ∪ {𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡}
9:  while |𝑈𝑘| > 0 do
10:  𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ← 𝐹 𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒
11:  for all 𝑗 ∈ 𝑈𝑘 do
12:  if (𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 then
13:  𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ← 𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑒
14:  Break ⊳ There is at least one unvisited node truck can 
immediately visit
15:  end if
16:  end for
17:  if 𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 then 
18:  𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 ← arg min𝑗∈𝑈𝑘,(𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡,𝑗 )∈𝐸 {𝑡𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡,𝑗 (𝜉)}
19:  Move 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 from 𝑈𝑘 to 𝑇 𝑇𝑘
20:  𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ← 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒
21:  else ⊳ Find a node to backtrack
22:  𝑇 ← 𝑇 𝑇𝑘 ⧵ {last element in 𝑇 𝑇𝑘} ⊳ Copy truck tour until the 
current node
23:  𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔 ← 0
24:  while |𝑇 | > 0 do
25:  𝐵𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒 ← last element in 𝑇
26:  for all 𝑗 ∈ 𝑈𝑘 do
27:  if (𝐵𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐸 then
28:  Apply Algorithm 4 and find the backtracking route 𝐵𝑘
29:  𝑇 𝑇𝑘 ← 𝑇 𝑇𝑘 ∪ 𝐵𝑘
30:  𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 ← arg min𝑗∈𝑈𝑘,(𝐵𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒,𝑗 )∈𝐸 {𝑡𝐵𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒,𝑗 (𝜉)}
31:  Move 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 from 𝑈𝑘 to 𝑇 𝑇𝑘
32:  Set 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ← 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 and 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔 ← 1
33:  Break ⊳ Truck can visit unvisited node if it 
backtracks to 𝐵𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒
34:  end if
35:  end for
36:  if 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔 = 0 then
37:  𝑇 ← 𝑇 ⧵ {𝐵𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒}
38:  if |𝑇 | = 1 then ⊳ Truck faces a dead-end and no 
backtrack node is found
39:  𝐷𝐿𝑘 ← 𝑈𝑘 ⊳ Assign all unvisited nodes to drone list
40:  𝑈𝑘 ← {}
41:  end if
42:  end if
43:  end while
44:  end if
45:  end while
46:  for all 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷𝑘 do
47:  if 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷𝐿𝑘 then
48:  𝐷𝑆𝑘 ← 𝐷𝑆𝑘 ∪ {𝑗} ⊳ Construct drone schedule
49:  end if
50:  end for
51:  for all 𝑗 ∈ 𝐷𝐿𝑘 do
52:  if 𝑗 ∉ 𝐷𝑘 then
53:  𝐷𝑆𝑘 ← 𝐷𝑆𝑘 ∪ {𝑗} ⊳ Add infeasible drone assignments to the 
drone schedule
54:  end if
55:  end for
56: end for
return 𝑅(𝑋, 𝜉)
5. Computational experiments
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our solution ap-
proach by comparing the results of our heuristic with those obtained 
Algorithm 4 Process of finding the shortest backtracking route
Step 1. Extracting the partial tour
1: Extract the exact tour from the point of backtrack until the current node. 
Step 2. Simplifying the partial tour
2: if there are revisited nodes then
3:  while there are revisited nodes do
4:  Remove the tour segment between the first and the last visit to the 
revisited node.
5:  end while
6: end if
Step 3. Finding the shortest route
7: for each node in the simplified tour do
8:  if there is direct connection between the node and current node then
9:  Truck continues to the node and follows the simplified tour 
backwards until reaching the backtrack node.
10:  Break for
11:  end if
12: end for
13: Truck follows the simplified tour backwards from the current node until 
reaching the point of backtrack.
Algorithm 5 Truck tour and drone schedule improvement heuristic
Function Improvement(𝑅, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥)
1: 𝑖 ← 0
2: while 𝑖 ≤ 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥 do
3:  𝑘 ← 1 ⊳ Initialise shake neighbourhood
4:  while 𝑘 < 𝑘 𝑚𝑎𝑥 do
5:  𝑤 ← ⌊1 + 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑(0, 1) × |𝑁𝑘(𝑅)|⌋
6:  𝑅′ ← 𝑁𝑘(𝑅)[𝑤] ⊳ Updated to 𝑤𝑡ℎ element of the neighbourhood 
7:  𝑙 ← 1 ⊳ Initialise local search neighbourhood
8:  while 𝑙 ≤ 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥 do 
9:  while ℎ(𝑅′) < ℎ(𝑅′′) do
10:  𝑅′′ ← 𝑅′
11:  𝑅′ ← arg min𝑅∈𝑁𝑙 (𝑅′′){ℎ(𝑅)}
12:  end while
13:  if 𝑓 (𝑅′′) ≤ ℎ(𝑅′) then 
14:  𝑅′ ← 𝑅′′
15:  𝑙 ← 1
16:  else
17:  𝑙 ← 𝑙 + 1
18:  end if
19:  end while ⊳ Until all local search neighbourhoods are used
20:  if 𝑓 (𝑅′) ≤ ℎ(𝑅) then 
21:  𝑅 ← 𝑅′
22:  𝑘 ← 1
23:  else
24:  𝑘 ← 𝑘 + 1
25:  end if
26:  end while ⊳ Until all shake neighbourhoods are used
27:  𝑖 ← 𝑖 + 1
28: end while ⊳ Until maximum iteration is reached
return 𝑅
from Gurobi on small-sized instances. We also apply the heuristic to a 
case study derived from the 2011 Van Earthquake in Turkiye to draw 
managerial insights, perform sensitivity analysis, and assess the value 
of incorporating stochasticity into our approach. In the first part of this 
section, we explain the problem instances used in the computational 
experiments. Then, we provide the results of our heuristic comparison 
with Gurobi, and those of the case study based on the Van Earthquake.
The mathematical models in our experiments are solved using 
Gurobi 11.0.3 through the Python API. The heuristic algorithm is 
implemented in C++ using Visual Studio 2022. All computational 
experiments are performed on a Windows 10 PC equipped with an 
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10510U CPU @ 2.30 GHz and 16 GB of RAM.
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
10 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Fig. 3. Damage intensity areas around disaster epicentre.
5.1. Problem instances
In the following sections, we explain how we generate the small-
sized instances and develop the case study.
5.1.1. Small-sized instances
For our first set of experiments, we generate 10 instances consisting 
of 15 demand nodes and 5 candidate depots. For these instances, we 
locate two depots and consider 10 different disaster scenarios.
Demand nodes were randomly placed in a 5, 000×5 , 000 unit square, 
with Euclidean distances and equal speeds for both vehicle types, 
ignoring drone travel time limits for simplicity. Each node is connected 
to each of its two closest neighbours with a probability of 0.7 each. In 
case no connection is formed in this way, the node is connected to its 
nearest neighbour. It is also connected to its third, fourth, and fifth 
closest neighbours with a probability of 0.1 for each. Candidate depot 
nodes are selected randomly from the demand nodes.
Disaster epicentres are randomly located, with two circular regions 
around them as described by Noyan et al. (2016). The radii of one-
tenth and one-fifth of the square’s side length around the epicentre, 
adjusted by a random multiplier U(0.8,1.6) to account for varying-
sized disasters, define destructive and damaging regions, respectively. 
The remaining area is considered to have strong intensity. Damage 
intensity of each edge is determined by the highest intensity of its two 
end nodes, depending on their location. Travel times are inflated by 
random factors: U(1.6,2.5) for destructive, U(1.25,1.6) for damaging, 
and U(1.0,1.25) for strong intensities. An illustration for this is given in 
Fig.  3. Here, the end nodes of edge AB are both in the damaging region, 
so it is marked as having damaging intensity. On the other hand, edges 
BC and CD are classified under destructive intensity, as C is situated 
in the destructive zone. All small-sized instances used in this study 
are publicly available at https://github.com/hannantureciisik/parallel-
truck-drone-small-instances.
5.1.2. Case study instances
We use a case study based on the earthquake which occurred in 
Van, Turkiye on October 23, 2011, at a magnitude of 7.2, followed 
by an aftershock of magnitude 5.6 on November 9, 2011. These re-
sulted in more than 600 people losing their lives and 2500 injured or 
hospitalised (IFRC, 2012).
We obtain the coordinates of the 94 demand locations from Noyan 
et al. (2016) and the truck travel times from Google Maps (Google, 
2024a). We create symmetric truck travel times by taking the maximum 
of the travel times between each pair of locations in both directions. 
For drone travel times, we calculate the geodesic distances between 
locations first by using the ‘geodesic’ function in the ‘geopy’ library 
in Python and divide the distances by drone speed. We double the 
resulting time to obtain the return flight time. Following (Murray & 
Chu, 2015), we use 25 mph (approximately 40 km/h) as drone speed 
and 30 min as drone endurance. We elaborate further on additional 
values in the sensitivity analysis.
We generate the road network as follows: The driving path between 
each pair of demand points are found by using Google Maps Directions 
API (Google, 2024b). If any of the intermediate points on the path 
between a pair of demand locations is within 0.01 units of latitude and 
longitude difference of any other demand location, we do not form an 
immediate edge between the given pair. Otherwise, we create a direct 
edge between these two demand locations if their geodesic distance is 
less than 10 km.
We generate 10 case study instances with 15 candidate depot loca-
tions, selected as a subset of the demand nodes. The candidate locations 
are chosen such that none of them share an edge with each other. We 
aim to locate 5 depots, considering 50 disaster scenarios.
To generate representative earthquake scenarios, we select six loca-
tions along the Van and Yenikosk fault lines. These are the two active 
fault lines lying between Van Lake and Ercek Lake in the area (MTA, 
2024) (see Online Appendix for the map representation). For each 
scenario, we randomly choose a location and generate the epicentre 
coordinates within a 5 km radius. To account for disasters of different 
sizes, we define two radii as a basis, 5 km and 10 km, to represent 
the same areas and increment these radii using a multiplier from 
a uniform distribution U(0.8,3). Additionally, we adjust truck travel 
times based on the edge classification. Edges within the highest de-
structive region based on their endpoints have travel times increased by 
multipliers from U(3,5), while those in damaging and strong categories 
see increases by multipliers from U(1.5,3) and U(1,1.5), respectively.
5.2. Computational results for smaller instances
Our smaller instances serve the purpose of evaluating the quality 
of heuristic solutions by comparison to the commercial solver Gurobi, 
for which we impose a 3-hour computational time limit. However, 
given the heavy computational burden to solve the two-stage stochastic 
mixed integer programming model, Gurobi is unable to close the MIP 
gap within the time limit to find the optimal solutions. To obtain the 
optimal solutions, we also run Gurobi by enumerating all possible sets 
of open depots and solving the resulting problem for each combination, 
where the open depot set with the minimum expected objective value 
provides the optimal solution.
In Table  3, we report the results of our experiments on smaller 
instances. These include the open depots, the integrality gap (denoted 
by % MIPGap), and the optimality gap (denoted by % Gap) of the 
Gurobi solutions after the 3-hour limit; the open depots and total CPU 
times (in seconds) for the Gurobi runs for the routing problem that yield 
the optimal solutions; and open depots, % Gap values, and CPU times 
for the heuristic with and without VNS improvement.
From Table  3, we observe that the heuristic consistently opens the 
optimal set of depots. Moreover, the average optimality gap of 0.3% 
indicates that the heuristic finds near-optimal truck routes and drone 
schedules under all scenarios. In five out of ten problem instances, the 
heuristic also finds the optimal truck–drone routes under all scenarios. 
The highest optimality gap among the remaining instances is 1.1%. 
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
11 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Table 3
Set of open depots, optimality gaps (where applicable), and CPU times (in seconds) of Gurobi results and those of the heuristic with and without VNS improvement.
 Instance Gurobi after 3-hour limit Gurobi for routing Heuristic - with improvement Heuristic - without improvement
 Open Depots % MIPGap % Gap Open Depots CPU timea Open Depots % Gap CPU time Open Depots % Gap CPU time  
 1 {0,2} 32.0 < 0.1 {0,2} 475.2 {0,2} 0.9 7.4 {2,3} 43.3 0.1  
 2 {0,2} 35.9 8.8 {0,1} 409.2 {0,1} 1.1 8.5 {3,4} 36.8 0.2  
 3 {3,4} 38.8 3.6 {0,3} 135.9 {0,3} 0.5 4.6 {3,4} 27.3 0.1  
 4 {0,1} 35.2 6.3 {1,2} 1,058.2 {1,2} 0.0 10.2 {2,4} 71.1 0.1  
 5 {2,4} 27.4 < 0.1 {2,4} 231.2 {2,4} 0.0 7.9 {1,4} 25.5 0.1  
 6 {0,1} 43.5 0.5 {0,1} 1,303.4 {0,1} 0.3 6.7 {1,3} 205.3 0.1  
 7 {1,2} 39.2 9.3 {1,3} 1,050.1 {1,3} 0.0 7.5 {0,1} 70.3 0.1  
 8 {0,3} 35.7 6.5 {0,4} 828.4 {0,4} 0.0 9.8 {2,3} 51.6 0.1  
 9 {1,3} 29.9 5.0 {2,4} 322.9 {2,4} 0.5 5.2 {2,4} 15.5 0.1  
 10 {0,3} 44.1 11.4 {2,4} 2,093.2 {2,4} 0.0 7.9 {1,4} 39.3 0.1  
 Average 36.2 5.1 790.8 0.3 7.6 58.6 0.1  
a Total CPU time to enumerate all open depot combinations.
Table 4
Averages and 95% confidence intervals for percent increase in objective value and percent decrease in CPU time when each neighbourhood is excluded.
 𝑁1 𝑁2 𝑁3 𝑁4 𝑁5 𝑁6 𝑁7  
 % increase in Avg 0.66 0.62 0.71 3.24 1.03 0.83 5.66  
 objective value 95% CI (0.19, 1.13) (0.28, 0.96) (0.08, 1.34) (1.67, 4.81) (0.36, 1.70) (0.32, 1.34) (3.17, 8.15)  
 % decrease in Avg 0.26 −1.05 4.87 6.84 0.13 −3.29 5.66  
 CPU time 95% CI (−14.45, 14.98) (−16.30, 14.20) (−6.86, 16.60) (0.71, 12.97) (−10.60, 10.86) (−18.05, 11.48) (−2.79, 14.11) 
The small interval of the optimality gap suggests the heuristic is robust 
in generating high-quality solutions. Furthermore, while the heuristic 
solves the instances within an average CPU time of only 3.6 s, We also 
observe that Gurobi cannot reduce the MIP Gap to less than 27.4% 
in any of the instances within 3-hour limit and takes an average of 
790.8 s to solve the routing problem for all possible sets of open depots. 
In all, these underline the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed 
heuristic, as it not only outperforms the commercial solver within the 
time limit in terms of the solution quality and computational times, but 
it also obtains near-optimal solutions.
We also run the heuristic without the VNS improvement step, such 
that Algorithm 2 remains unchanged except for the exclusion of line 
3. The results are presented under ‘Heuristic without improvement’ in 
Table  3. While the average computing time decreases substantially, an 
optimality gap of 58.6% is observed without the improvement step. In 
particular, for instance 6, optimality gap is observed as 205%. These 
highlight the importance of the VNS-based improvement heuristic in 
the construction of vehicle routes.
We also use our smaller instances to analyse the effect of including 
each neighbourhood structure in the heuristic approach. Table  4 shows 
the averages and 95% confidence intervals for percent increase in 
objective value and percent decrease in CPU time when each of the 
7 neighbourhoods is excluded. Among these, 𝑁7 (complete reconstruc-
tion of a truck tour) is most influential, with a loss of 5.66% in the 
objective value in its absence. This underlines the importance of the 
shaking step of the VNS, as this neighbourhood is only used for shaking. 
𝑁4 (drone to truck reassignment for the same depot) is also quite 
effective as it improves the objective value by an average of 3.24%. 
As expected, all remaining neighbourhoods have a positive but small 
effect on solution quality. From the 95% confidence intervals on CPU 
time changes, we observe that for all but one of the neighbourhoods, 
the change is statistically insignificant. The only exception is 𝑁4, where 
a positive CPU time decrease is almost certain in its absence. On the 
other hand, given its significant improvement to the objective function, 
we retain this neighbourhood in the heuristic, as we do all other 
neighbourhoods, for the remainder of our experiments.
5.3. Computational results with case study instances
In this section, we implement the heuristic on 10 case study in-
stances to analyse the structure of the heuristic solutions, compare 
our approach to various benchmarks, perform sensitivity analysis on 
important parameters, and evaluate the value of using a stochastic 
approach.
5.3.1. Analysis of heuristic results
Table  5 displays the set of open depots, arrival times (in hours), 
and CPU times (in seconds) for the case study experiments. From 
the CPU times, we observe that the heuristic can find solutions to 
these instances within an average and maximum of 40 and 65 min, 
respectively. Given that these models are run in the pre-disaster stage, 
these computing times are acceptable for this context. On average, 
beneficiaries receive aid within 1.5 h of the start of operations, while 
the average makespan is 8 h over all instances. The table also provides 
the expected average arrival time at demand nodes visited by trucks 
or drones. In all instances, demand nodes served by drones have better 
expected average response times (1 h on average) compared to those 
visited by trucks (an average of 1.8 h). However, drone endurance poses 
a limitation to a better distribution of demand nodes between both 
vehicles.
Fig.  4 illustrates the heuristic result for Instance 10, while the 
road network and the candidate depot locations for this instance are 
shown in Fig.  5a. We note that the results for this instance are rep-
resentative of those for other instances as well. The most frequently 
served demand nodes are indicated with the coverage area for each 
open depot across all scenarios. Demand locations are marked by their 
most frequently serving vehicle, and the shading of the vehicle further 
indicates the frequency of the assignment across the scenarios. Demand 
nodes that are further away from their allocated depot tend to be 
assigned to trucks. Conversely, the majority of the demand locations 
closer to their assigned depot are assigned to drones. Allocating further 
locations to truck is expected because of endurance and single visit 
constraints of drone. Furthermore, if we draw the smallest convex 
polygon encapsulating all open depots, demand locations within that 
region are mostly assigned to drones as most of these locations are 
drone eligible. Note that the circle around one of the open depots shows 
the approximate range for drone visits based on the endurance limit. 
The results for Instance 10 in Table  5 indicate that the expected average 
arrival time for trucks is higher than that for drones. This imbalance 
highlights the impact of drone flight endurance on vehicle allocation 
of demand nodes. Thus, increased endurance may result in more drone 
assignments and reduced waiting times.
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
12 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Table 5
Set of open depots, arrival times (in hours), and CPU times (in seconds) for the case study experiments.
 Instance Open depots Average Maximum Average arrival Average arrival  
 arrival time arrival time time - trucks time - drones  CPU time 
 1 {0,1,2,9,11} 1.37 7.19 1.57 1.08 2,364  
 2 {0,1,2,11,13} 1.50 10.17 1.80 1.05 3,824  
 3 {1,3,8,9,10} 1.60 8.17 1.93 1.05 2,062  
 4 {0,3,8,9,13} 1.40 6.51 1.66 1.08 2,215  
 5 {2,4,8,9,14} 1.52 7.9 1.92 0.95 2,111  
 6 {0,1,2,5,7} 1.49 7.26 1.87 0.89 2,245  
 7 {2,7,10,11,13} 1.45 6.79 1.71 1.05 1,718  
 8 {6,9,10,11,12} 1.51 8.13 1.82 0.93 3,880  
 9 {0,3,6,7,8} 1.62 9.14 2.01 0.95 1,787  
 10 {1,4,6,9,14} 1.68 8.79 2.13 0.91 1,811  
 Average 1.51 8.01 1.84 0.99 2,402  
Fig. 4. Map demonstration of heuristic result for Instance 10: open depots, node–depot allocations and truck–drone assignment frequencies across all scenarios. 
Each colour indicates different depot and its assigned nodes.
5.3.2. Comparison to benchmarks
Table  6 features comparative results derived from three benchmarks 
that use (i) only trucks to perform the deliveries, (ii) the heuristic with 
pre-disaster travel times, and (iii) the K-means algorithm for facility 
location. These benchmark cases are implemented on the same 10 
case study instances, and their performances are compared against the 
baseline heuristic results (Table  5). For each benchmark, the set of open 
depots, the expected average arrival time (in hours), and the objective 
function gap relative to the baseline are reported.
Heuristic results for truck-only operations, as shown in Table  6, 
indicate an average gap of 116.8% across 10 instances compared to the 
baseline truck–drone results. This gap is calculated for each instance 
using the formula: %Gap = 𝑧𝑏−𝑧ℎ
𝑧ℎ
× 100% , where 𝑧𝑏 is the objective 
value of the benchmark (e.g., truck-only) case and 𝑧ℎ is that of the 
baseline heuristic. The average of these gap values across all instances 
gives the reported 116.8%. In terms of the expected average arrival 
time across all instances, this translates approximately to the truck-
only system requiring an average of 3.3 h per demand node, whereas 
truck–drone delivery significantly reduces the average arrival time to 
1.5 h, as shown in Table  5. Fig.  5b demonstrates the corresponding 
heuristic results for Instance 10 on a map. In this particular instance, 
the locations of three open depots are the same as in the parallel 
truck–drone case with different coverage areas. Despite this, the fact 
that all demand nodes are serviced by trucks, as opposed to closer 
demand nodes being serviced by drones, results in more than double 
the expected latency.
To implement the second benchmark, we run the heuristic with 
a single scenario that uses the pre-disaster travel times on the road 
network. The performance of the identified depots in the post-disaster 
response is then evaluated using the DepotEvaluation algorithm across 
all disaster scenarios. This approach allows us to analyse the signifi-
cance of damage assessment. From Table  6, incorporating road damage 
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
13 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Fig. 5. Instance 10 map demonstrations. Each colour indicates different depot and its assigned nodes.
Table 6
Set of open depots, expected average arrival time (𝑧𝑏) and % objective gap (% Gap) against heuristic solutions for benchmark 
cases.
 Instance Truck-only operations No road damage assessment K-means depot location
 Open Depots 𝑧𝑏 % Gap Open Depots 𝑧𝑏 % Gap Open Depots 𝑧𝑏 % Gap 
 1 {0,2,9,11,14} 3.1 125.0 {0,1,2,4,10} 1.6 14.6 {0,8,9,11,14} 1.8 30.4  
 2 {1,3,6,8,14} 3.4 124.6 {1,2,3,5,6} 1.7 14.8 {0,1,2,11,13} 1.5 0.2  
 3 {5,6,7,12,14} 3.3 105.9 {1,5,6,7,13} 1.7 5.9 {1,3,8,10,14} 1.6 0.9  
 4 {4,8,11,12,13} 3.5 149.8 {0,1,3,9,13} 1.4 < 0.1 {0,1,3,6,9} 1.8 30.2  
 5 {1,3,8,11,14} 3.3 113.2 {2,3,4,5,9} 1.6 7.7 {2,7,8,12,14} 2.0 29.2  
 6 {0,4,10,11,12} 3.2 113.4 {0,2,5,7,14} 1.7 15.2 infeasible   
 7 {2,6,7,10,13} 3.2 119.0 {2,6,7,11,13} 1.5 1.5 infeasible   
 8 {2,3,4,5,12} 3.3 115.0 {0,3,6,9,10} 1.5 < 0.1 {0,1,2,3,5} 1.6 5.2  
 9 {0,3,7,12,13} 3.4 106.7 {0,2,3,6,12} 1.6 < 0.1 {0,1,2,5,13} 2.1 27.1  
 10 {5,6,7,9,14} 3.3 95.2 {0,4,8,9,10} 1.9 15.0 {0,4,8,11,12} 2.2 29.3  
 Average 3.3 116.8 1.6 7.4 1.8 19.1  
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
14 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
results in an average of 7.4% decrease in the expected objective, corre-
sponding to a total of 10.5 h of response time, emphasising the critical 
role of damage assessment in disaster response. The demonstration of 
results based on pre-disaster conditions for instance 10 is shown in 
Fig.  5c with the corresponding truck–drone tours and open depots. The 
main difference from the baseline heuristic result given in Fig.  4 is 
the location of the open depot covering the northern part of the map. 
Considering the baseline map and the coverage area on the northern 
part, demand nodes closer to the fault lines between Van and Ercek 
Lake are assigned to drones. Conversely, in the no-assessment case, they 
are served by trucks, leading to the opening of a different depot.
To evaluate the importance of integrating pre-disaster location and 
post-disaster routing decisions, we compare our results against a bench-
mark where depot locations are determined simply based on geograph-
ical locations of the candidates, using a K-means clustering algorithm 
to locate the depots and assign demand nodes to open depots. We 
then use the DepotEvaluation algorithm for the identified depots and 
obtain the expected sum of the arrival times. On average, we observe 
a 19.1% increase in the expected objective when a K-Means approach 
is used. Furthermore, K-Means results in infeasible truck–drone tours 
for Instances 6 and 7 due to drone endurance constraints. We illustrate 
the K-Means result for Instance 10 in Fig.  5d, where open depots and 
the coverage areas are significantly different from those in the baseline 
results. K-Means results in a more homogeneous distribution of open 
depots on the map, as expected. However, the demand nodes closer to 
fault lines are most frequently distributed among three open depots, 
whereas they are served by four open depots in the baseline.
5.3.3. Sensitivity analysis
In this section, we evaluate the effects of varying drone endurance, 
drone speed, and number of open depots on the expected average 
response time, providing insights into their impact on operational 
efficiency.
First, Fig.  6a depicts the impact of varying the number of open 
depots on the expected average arrival time across 10 instances. The 
results show the average arrival time varies between 3.4 and 0.4 h for 
3 and 15 open depots, respectively. Each additional depot, equipped 
with a truck and a drone, contributes to significantly better response 
times, albeit at a diminishing rate. This suggests a trade-off between 
the investment cost and the response time, providing insights for the 
decision-making process regarding the optimal number of open depots 
to employ.
Apart from the baseline flight endurance of 30 min, we also explore 
the effect of longer flight endurance, specifically 1 h, 2 h, and unlimited 
time. Small delivery drones generally have shorter endurance than 
1 h (JD, 2018; The Sun, 2022), but we consider higher endurance 
values considering future developments in drone technology. Fig.  6b 
shows the impact of the varying endurance on the expected average 
arrival time, illustrating the impact of extended battery life on reducing 
response times. Extending the endurance from 30 min to 1 h decreases 
the average arrival time by 18 min, by 20%. However, an additional 
hour increase beyond 1 h yields only marginal improvement in the 
objective, around 1%. Moreover, transitioning to an unlimited battery 
life does not yield an improvement in the arrival time compared 
to the two-hour limit. In more densely located areas, the impact of 
improved battery life on response times might be even less pronounced. 
These findings indicate that even the current drone technology can be 
beneficial to achieve timely humanitarian aid delivery.
Lastly, we explore varying drone speeds as considered by Murray 
and Chu (2015), specifically 24 km/h (15 mph) and 56 km/h (35 mph), 
as well as the maximum drone speeds reported by some big retailer 
companies (JD, 2018; The Sun, 2022), which reach up to 100 km/h. 
We use 72, 88 and 104 km/h to represent these reported speeds. These 
are compared to the baseline drone speed of 40 km/h (25 mph). Fig. 
6c illustrates the change in the expected average arrival time across 10 
instances. Although subject to diminishing returns, an increase in drone 
speed significantly improves the response time. Specifically, drones op-
erating at 56 km/h reduce the average arrival time by 24 min compared 
to our baseline drone speed, corresponding to a 26% improvement.
5.3.4. Value of stochastic solution and expected value of perfect informa-
tion
As our last analysis, we calculate the Value of Stochastic Solution 
(VSS) and the Expected Value of Perfect Information (EVPI) to assess 
the value of a stochastic modelling approach. We consider the same 
10 case study instances used in the heuristic analysis, as presented in 
Section 5.3 and Table  5. Let 𝑧ℎ denote the expected average arrival time 
across all instances, as obtained from the heuristic analysis in Table  5.
VSS indicates the expected gain obtained from incorporating un-
certainties into the model and using a stochastic modelling approach, 
rather than solving its deterministic counterpart based on the expected 
values of the uncertain parameters. In other words, it shows how much 
worse the solution would be if average values were used instead of 
considering uncertainties in the decision making. The deterministic 
counterpart of our problem has travel times equal to the expected travel 
times on the road network, which defines the Expected Value Problem 
(EVP). We solve the EVP with our heuristic as if there were a single 
scenario to find the depot locations. Then, the post-disaster truck–drone 
routes under all scenarios are generated by DepotEvaluation algorithm 
for the resulting depot locations. Following this method, we obtain the 
expected average arrival times when EVP is solved, denoted by 𝑧𝐸𝑉𝑃 . 
The difference in the expected objective values of the stochastic model, 
𝑧ℎ, and the deterministic model where the uncertainties are replaced 
with average values, 𝑧𝐸𝑉𝑃 , gives the VSS. The relative VSS (%VSS) is 
then calculated as: %𝑉𝑆𝑆 = 𝑧𝐸𝑉𝑃 −𝑧ℎ
𝑧ℎ
× 100% . For our instances, the 
average VSS across all instances (%VSS) is obtained as 3.4%. Although 
the average gain appears small, it corresponds to a total of 4.5 h of 
improvement in the response time across all nodes. Furthermore, the 
maximum %VSS across all instances is obtained as 17.4%, indicating 
a total improvement of 24.5 h. Considering the importance of timely 
delivery, using a stochastic modelling approach for preparedness stage 
decisions can improve the performance of post-disaster operations.
Expected Value of Perfect Information (EVPI) shows the maximum 
improvement one would obtain from having the perfect information. 
It corresponds to the expected gain when decisions are made under 
known future information. We treat each disaster scenario as a known 
future scenario and give depot location decisions based solely on the 
post-disaster routing for this scenario. To do so, we run the heuristic 
for only the scenario under consideration. The overall expectation 
across all scenarios gives the expected value of decision-making with 
perfect information, denoted by 𝑧𝑃 𝐼. On the other hand, we have the 
expected objective value from the stochastic model, 𝑧ℎ. Their difference 
is denoted by EVPI, which states the maximum gain from having perfect 
knowledge. The relative value is calculated as follows: %𝐸𝑉 𝑃 𝐼 =
𝑧ℎ−𝑧𝑃 𝐼
𝑧𝑃 𝐼
× 100%. Across the 10 instances, we obtain a %EVPI of 7.6%, 
which corresponds to 10 h. The maximum %EVPI across all instances 
results in a difference of 20 h in response time. These findings suggest 
that having better knowledge and a good identification of the disaster 
can significantly improve the response time in the post-disaster stage.
6. Conclusions and further research directions
Road networks are essential to achieve timely response in the post-
disaster and disasters can severely disrupt the road networks and 
hinder the humanitarian response activities. The uncertain nature of 
the disasters makes it challenging to plan and execute timely response 
operations. In this paper, we consider parallel truck–drone deliveries 
from depots to deliver light-weight humanitarian aid bundles to ben-
eficiaries. We define a stochastic network design problem to locate 
the depots in the pre-disaster while also considering the post-disaster 
routing decisions. Road network vulnerability is specifically addressed 
via inflated travel times to reflect disaster-related uncertainties. Drones, 
in addition to trucks, are involved to make aid delivery to overcome the 
longer travel times and achieve better response times.
We model the stochastic location-routing problem with trucks and 
drones as a two-stage stochastic programming model. The objective 
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
15 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Fig. 6. Relationship between the average objective value and varying (a) number of open depots, (b) drone endurance, and (c) drone speed.
is to minimise the expected average waiting times of the demand 
locations. Our experiments show that Gurobi cannot solve the problem 
within a reasonable time limits even on small-sized problems. Thus, we 
develop a problem-tailored heuristic based on local search and VNS for 
location and routing decisions, respectively. Optimality gaps are shown 
to be very small on small-sized problems, and the proposed heuristic 
can solve large instances within reasonable times. Our experiments on 
a case study indicate that drones can significantly reduce the response 
times compared to a truck-only system, with the expected average 
arrival time decreasing from 3.3 h to 1.5 h, marking an improvement 
of approximately 55%. The proposed approach can potentially help 
humanitarian agencies make strategic decisions such as location and 
pre-positioning of relief items, equipment, and vehicles, and evalu-
ate the effect of integrating drones into their fleet on disaster-prone 
regions.
In this paper, we consider parallel truck and drone deliveries from 
depots. This structure is mainly reasonable when most of the demand 
locations are drone-eligible such that drones can provide rapid de-
liveries from depots within the endurance limit. However, if most of 
the demand locations are not eligible, the extension of the current 
stochastic location-routing problem with a synchronised truck–drone 
delivery model must be considered to expand the drone service area. 
This would allow drone utilisation in that scenario and provide more 
flexibility even on the current considered problem environments and 
improve the response times further. Furthermore, comparison of differ-
ent truck–drone structures on different problem instances can provide 
further managerial insights. Different uncertainties other than the road 
vulnerability can also be incorporated into the network design problem 
such as uncertain demand requests from demand locations or demand 
quantities. Another practical extension is the use of multiple vehicles 
of the same type in each depot. Introduction of such properties would 
make the problem even more complex and necessitate efficient and 
effective solution approaches.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hannan Tureci-Isik: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Val-
idation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Con-
ceptualization. Melih Çelik: Writing – review & editing, Validation, 
Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Con-
ceptualization. Ece Sanci: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, 
Project administration, Methodology, Conceptualization.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2025.08.057.
References
Agatz, N., Bouman, P., & Schmidt, M. (2018). Optimization approaches for the traveling 
salesman problem with drone. Transportation Science, 52(4), 965–981.
Ahmadi, M., Seifi, A., & Tootooni, B. (2015). A humanitarian logistics model for disaster 
relief operation considering network failure and standard relief time: A case study 
on san francisco district. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 75, 145–163.
Albareda-Sambola, M., & Rodríguez-Pereira, J. (2019). Location-routing and location-
arc routing. In G. Laporte, S. Nickel, & F. S. da Gama (Eds.), Location science (pp. 
431–451). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Amazon (2023). Amazon is launching ultra-fast drone deliveries in Italy, the UK, 
and a third location in the U.S. https://www.aboutamazon.com/news/operations/
amazon-prime-air-drone-delivery-updates. (Accessed 26 March 2024).
Amiri, M., Amin, S. H., & Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R. (2019). A Lagrangean decompo-
sition approach for a novel two-echelon node-based location-routing problem in 
an offshore oil and gas supply chain. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and 
Transportation Review, 128, 96–114.
Aslan, E., & Çelik, M. (2019). Pre-positioning of relief items under road/facility 
vulnerability with concurrent restoration and relief transportation. IISE Transactions, 
51(8), 847–868.
Blazewicz, J., Ecker, K., Pesch, E., Schmidt, G., & Weglarz, J. (2019). Handbook on 
scheduling. Springer.
Bozorgi-Amiri, A., & Khorsi, M. (2016). A dynamic multi-objective location–routing 
model for relief logistic planning under uncertainty on demand, travel time, and 
cost parameters. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 85, 
1633–1648.
Çalık, H., Oulamara, A., Prodhon, C., & Salhi, S. (2021). The electric location-
routing problem with heterogeneous fleet: Formulation and benders decomposition 
approach. Computers & Operations Research, 131, Article 105251.
Canbilen Sütiçen, T., Batun, S., & Çelik, M. (2023). Integrated reinforcement and repair 
of interdependent infrastructure networks under disaster-related uncertainties. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 308(1), 369–384.
Carlsson, J. G., & Song, S. (2018). Coordinated logistics with a truck and a drone. 
Management Science, 64(9), 4052–4069.
Caunhye, A. M., Zhang, Y., Li, M., & Nie, X. (2016). A location-routing model for 
prepositioning and distributing emergency supplies. Transportation Research Part E: 
Logistics and Transportation Review, 90, 161–176.
Celik, M. (2016). Network restoration and recovery in humanitarian operations: Frame-
work, literature review, and research directions. Surveys in Operations Research and 
Management Science, 21(2), 47–61.
Chang, K., Zhou, H., Chen, G., & Chen, H. (2017). Multiobjective location routing 
problem considering uncertain data after disasters. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and 
Society, 2017(1), Article 1703608.
Chowdhury, S., Emelogu, A., Marufuzzaman, M., Nurre, S. G., & Bian, L. (2017). Drones 
for disaster response and relief operations: A continuous approximation model. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 188, 167–184.
Chung, S. H., Sah, B., & Lee, J. (2020). Optimization for drone and drone-truck 
combined operations: A review of the state of the art and future directions. 
Computers & Operations Research, 123, Article 105004.
Cokyasar, T., Dong, W., Jin, M., & Verbas, İ. Ö. (2021). Designing a drone delivery 
network with automated battery swapping machines. Computers & Operations 
Research, 129, Article 105177.
Dayarian, I., Savelsbergh, M., & Clarke, J. P. (2020). Same-day delivery with drone 
resupply. Transportation Science, 54(1), 229–249.
De Maio, A., Musmanno, R., & Vocaturo, F. (2023). Unbiased decision making in 
location-routing problems with uncertain customer demands. Soft Computing, 27(1), 
12883–12893.
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
16 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Dell’Amico, M., Montemanni, R., & Novellani, S. (2020). Matheuristic algorithms for the 
parallel drone scheduling traveling salesman problem. Annals of Operations Research, 
289(2), 211–226.
Drexl, M., & Schneider, M. (2015). A survey of variants and extensions of 
the location-routing problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 241(2), 
283–308.
Dukkanci, O., Campbell, J. F., & Kara, B. Y. (2023). Facility location decisions for drone 
delivery: A literature review. European Journal of Operational Research, 316(2), 
397–418.
Dukkanci, O., Campbell, J. F., & Kara, B. Y. (2024). Facility location decisions for 
drone delivery with riding: A literature review. Computers & Operations Research, 
167, Article 106672.
FAA (2023a). The FAA authorizes UPS flight forward and uavionix to operate drones 
beyond visual line of sight. https://www.faa.gov/newsroom/faa-authorizes-ups-
uavionix. (Accessed 26 March 2024).
FAA (2023b). FAA authorizes zipline international, inc. to deliver commercial packages 
using drones that fly beyond operator’s line of sight. https://www.faa.gov/
newsroom/faa-authorizes-zipline-deliver-commercial-packages-beyond-line-sight. 
(Accessed 26 March 2024).
FEMA (2022). HAZUS. https://www.fema.gov/flood-maps/products-tools/hazus. (Ac-
cessed 23 April 2024).
Ferrandez, S. M., Harbison, T., Weber, T., Sturges, R., & Rich, R. (2016). Optimization 
of a truck-drone in tandem delivery network using K-means and genetic algorithm. 
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management (JIEM), 9(2), 374–388.
Gómez-Lagos, J., Candia-Véjar, A., & Encina, F. (2021). A new truck-drone routing 
problem for parcel delivery services aided by parking lots. IEEE Access, 9, 
11091–11108.
Google (2024a). Google maps. https://www.google.com/maps. (Accessed 3 May 2024).
Google (2024b). Google maps directions API. https://developers.google.com/maps/
documentation/directions. (Accessed 15 May 2024).
Mirzapour Al-e Hashem, S. M. J., Hejazi, T. H., Haghverdizadeh, G., & Shidpour, M. 
(2024). Optimizing last-mile delivery services: a robust truck-drone cooperation 
model and hybrid metaheuristic algorithm. Annals of Operations Research, 1–31.
Hsueh, C. F., Chen, H. K., & Chou, H. W. (2008). Dynamic vehicle routing for relief 
logistics in natural disasters. In T. Caric, & H. Gold (Eds.), Vehicle routing problem 
(pp. 71–84). Vienna, Austria: InTech.
IFRC (2012). Emergency Appeal Operation Update Turkey: Van Earthquake: Technical 
Report, IFRC, URL: https://adore.ifrc.org/Download.aspx?FileId=23186. (Accessed 
9 January 2024).
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (2018). Emer-
gency items catalogue. URL: https://sheltercluster.org/working-group-nfi-practices/
documents/ifrcicrc-emergency-items-catalogue. (Accessed 9 June 2025).
JD (2018). JD drone factsheet. URL: https://jdcorporateblog.com/wp-content/uploads/
2018/05/JD-Drone-factsheet.pdf. (Accessed 17 June 2024).
Kang, M., & Lee, C. (2021). An exact algorithm for heterogeneous drone-truck routing 
problem. Transportation Science, 55(5), 1088–1112.
Kim, S., & Moon, I. (2018). Traveling salesman problem with a drone station. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 49(1), 42–52.
Klibi, W., Lasalle, F., Martel, A., & Ichoua, S. (2010). The stochastic multiperiod location 
transportation problem. Transportation Science, 44(2), 221–237.
Kloster, K., Moeini, M., Vigo, D., & Wendt, O. (2023). The multiple traveling salesman 
problem in presence of drone-and robot-supported packet stations. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 305(2), 630–643.
Koç, Ç., Bektaş, T., Jabali, O., & Laporte, G. (2016). The fleet size and mix location-
routing problem with time windows: Formulations and a heuristic algorithm. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 248(1), 33–51.
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. M. (2007). Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations. 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 37(2), 99–114.
Letchford, A. N., Nasiri, S. D., & Theis, D. O. (2013). Compact formulations of the 
steiner traveling salesman problem and related problems. European Journal of 
Operational Research, 228(1), 83–92.
Macrina, G., Pugliese, L. D., Guerriero, F., & Laporte, G. (2020). Drone-aided routing: A 
literature review. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 120, Article 
102762.
Mara, S. T. W., Kuo, R., & Asih, A. M. S. (2021). Location-routing problem: a 
classification of recent research. International Transactions in Operational Research, 
28(6), 2941–2983.
Matternet (2024). Matternet. https://www.mttr.net/. (Accessed 22 February 2024).
Mbiadou Saleu, R. G., Deroussi, L., Feillet, D., Grangeon, N., & Quilliot, A. (2018). 
An iterative two-step heuristic for the parallel drone scheduling traveling salesman 
problem. Networks, 72(4), 459–474.
McCunney, B., & Cauwenberghe, K. (2019). Simulation test bed for drone-supported 
logistics systems. (Master’s thesis), Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Mete, H. O., & Zabinsky, Z. B. (2010). Stochastic optimization of medical supply 
location and distribution in disaster management. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 126(1), 76–84.
Montaña, L. C., Malagon-Alvarado, L., Miranda, P. A., Arboleda, M. M., Solano-
Charris, E. L., & Vega-Mejía, C. A. (2022). A novel mathematical approach 
for the truck-and-drone location-routing problem. Procedia Computer Science, 200, 
1378–1391.
Morim, A., Campuzano, G., Amorim, P., Mes, M., & Lalla-Ruiz, E. (2024). The 
drone-assisted vehicle routing problem with robot stations. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 238, Article 121741.
Moshref-Javadi, M., Hemmati, A., & Winkenbach, M. (2021). A comparative analysis of 
synchronized truck-and-drone delivery models. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 
162, Article 107648.
Moshref-Javadi, M., & Lee, S. (2017). Using drones to minimize latency in distribution 
systems. In IIE annual conference. proceedings (pp. 235–240). Institute of Industrial 
and Systems Engineers (IISE).
Moshref-Javadi, M., & Winkenbach, M. (2021). Applications and research avenues for 
drone-based models in logistics: A classification and review. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 177, Article 114854.
MTA (2024). Active fault line maps. https://www.mta.gov.tr/v3.0/hizmetler/diri-fay-
haritalari. (Accessed 10 January 2024).
Murray, C. C., & Chu, A. G. (2015). The flying sidekick traveling salesman problem: 
Optimization of drone-assisted parcel delivery. Transportation Research Part C: 
Emerging Technologies, 54, 86–109.
Nagy, G., & Salhi, S. (2007). Location-routing: Issues, models and methods. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 177(2), 649–672.
Nguyen, M. A., Dang, G. T. H., Hà, M. H., & Pham, M. T. (2022). The min-cost parallel 
drone scheduling vehicle routing problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 
299(3), 910–930.
Noyan, N., Balcik, B., & Atakan, S. (2016). A stochastic optimization model for 
designing last mile relief networks. Transportation Science, 50(3), 1092–1113.
Oberlin, P., Rathinam, S., & Darbha, S. (2009). A transformation for a heterogeneous, 
multiple depot, multiple traveling salesman problem. In 2009 American control 
conference (pp. 1292–1297). IEEE.
Otto, A., Agatz, N., Campbell, J., Golden, B., & Pesch, E. (2018). Optimization 
approaches for civil applications of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or aerial 
drones: A survey. Networks, 72(4), 411–458.
Ozyavas, P., Buijs, P., Ursavas, E., & Teunter, R. (2025). Designing a sustainable 
delivery network with parcel locker systems as collection and transfer points. 
Omega, 131, Article 103199.
Prodhon, C., & Prins, C. (2014). A survey of recent research on location-routing 
problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 238(1), 1–17.
Rezaei Kallaj, M., Hasannia Kolaee, M., & Mirzapour Al-e Hashem, S. (2023). Integrating 
bloodmobiles and drones in a post-disaster blood collection problem considering 
blood groups. Annals of Operations Research, 321(1-2), 783–811.
Rojas Viloria, D., Solano-Charris, E. L., Muñoz-Villamizar, A., & Montoya-Torres, J. R. 
(2021). Unmanned aerial vehicles/drones in vehicle routing problems: a literature 
review. International Transactions in Operational Research, 28(4), 1626–1657.
Sabouhi, F., Bozorgi-Amiri, A., & Vaez, P. (2021). Stochastic optimization for trans-
portation planning in disaster relief under disruption and uncertainty. Kybernetes, 
50(9), 2632–2650.
Salman, F. S., & Yücel, E. (2015). Emergency facility location under random network 
damage: Insights from the Istanbul case. Computers & Operations Research, 62, 
266–281.
Schermer, D., Moeini, M., & Wendt, O. (2019). The traveling salesman drone sta-
tion location problem. In World congress on global optimization (pp. 1129–1138). 
Springer.
Schneider, M., & Drexl, M. (2017). A survey of the standard location-routing problem. 
Annals of Operations Research, 259, 389–414.
Scott, J. E., & Scott, C. H. (2019). Models for drone delivery of medications and other 
healthcare items. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Breakthroughs in Research and Practice, 
376–392.
Snoeck, A., Winkenbach, M., & Mascarino, E. E. (2018). Establishing a robust urban 
logistics network at FEMSA through stochastic multi-echelon location routing. In 
E. Taniguchi, & R. G. Thompson (Eds.), City logistics 2 (pp. 59–78). John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd.
Temiz, S., Kazanç, H. C., Soysal, M., & Çimen, M. (2025). A probabilistic bi-objective 
model for a humanitarian location-routing problem under uncertain demand and 
road closure. International Transactions in Operational Research, 32(2), 590–625.
The Guardian (2021). ‘Gamechanger’: Uganda launches drone delivering HIV drugs 
to remote islands. https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2021/
may/04/gamechanger-uganda-launches-drone-delivering-hiv-drugs-to-remote-
islands?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other. (Accessed 22 May 2021).
The Guardian (2024). Drones could deliver medical supplies under UK travel watch-
dog plans. https://amp.theguardian.com/technology/2024/feb/20/drones-could-
deliver-medical-supplies-under-uk-travel-watchdog-plans. (Accessed 22 February 
2024).
The Sun (2022). Amazon’s giant new super drone delivers packages to your door 
shockingly fast - but has a frustrating catch. URL: https://www.thesun.co.uk/tech/
20404011/amazons-giant-new-super-drone-mk30/. (Accessed 17 June 2024).
Ukkusuri, S. V., & Yushimito, W. F. (2008). Location routing approach for the 
humanitarian prepositioning problem. Transportation Research Record, 2089(1), 
18–25.
UNICEF (2025). Interagency emergency health kit (IEHK). URL: https://www.unicef.
org/supply/interagency-emergency-health-kit. (Accessed 9 June 2025).
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
17 

H. Tureci-Isik et al.
Van Steenbergen, R., Mes, M., & Van Heeswijk, W. (2023). Reinforcement learning 
for humanitarian relief distribution with trucks and UAVs under travel time 
uncertainty. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 157, Article 
104401.
Walmart (2024). Sky high ambitions: Walmart to make largest drone delivery expansion 
of any U.S. retailer. https://corporate.walmart.com/news/2024/01/09/sky-high-
ambitions-walmart-to-make-largest-drone-delivery-expansion-of-any-us-retailer. (Ac-
cessed 26 March 2024).
Wang, S., Sun, W., Baldacci, R., & Elomri, A. (2025). Exact solution of location–
routing problems with heterogeneous fleet and weight-based carbon emissions. 
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 193, Article 
103862.
Wang, J., Yuan, L., Zhang, Z., Gao, S., Sun, Y., & Zhou, Y. (2019). Multiobjective 
multiple neighborhood search algorithms for multiobjective fleet size and mix 
location-routing problem with time windows. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, 
and Cybernetics: Systems, 51(4), 2284–2298.
Wingcopter GmbH (2022). Wingcopter 198 drone specifications. https://wingcopter.
com. (Accessed 5 June 2025).
World Food Programme (2023). WFP drones. https://drones.wfp.org/. (Accessed 22 
February 2024).
Yin, Y., Yang, Y., Yu, Y., Wang, D., & Cheng, T. (2023). Robust vehicle routing with 
drones under uncertain demands and truck travel times in humanitarian logistics. 
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 174, Article 102781.
Young, L. (2024). Delivery drones are gaining a clearer commercial flight 
path. Wall Street Journal (Online), Access may be restricted, URL: https:
//www.wsj.com/articles/delivery-drones-are-gaining-a-clearer-commercial-flight-
path-dec702be?mod=Searchresults_pos1&page=1.
Yucesoy, E., Balcik, B., & Coban, E. (2024). The role of drones in disaster response: 
A literature review of operations research applications. International Transactions in 
Operational Research, 32(2), 1–45.
Zhao, Q., Wang, W., & De Souza, R. (2018). A heterogeneous fleet two-echelon 
capacitated location-routing model for joint delivery arising in city logistics. 
International Journal of Production Research, 56(15), 5062–5080.
Zhong, S., Cheng, R., Jiang, Y., Wang, Z., Larsen, A., & Nielsen, O. A. (2020). 
Risk-averse optimization of disaster relief facility location and vehicle routing 
under stochastic demand. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 141, Article 102015.
Zhou, L., Lin, Y., Wang, X., & Zhou, F. (2019). Model and algorithm for bilevel 
multisized terminal location-routing problem for the last mile delivery. International 
Transactions in Operational Research, 26(1), 131–156.
Zhou, L., Silva, D. F., & Smith, A. E. (2023). Locating drone stations for a truck-drone 
delivery system in continuous space. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 
29(1), 158–171.
Zipline (2023). Technical capabilities. https://www.flyzipline.com. (Accessed 5 June 
2025).
European Journal of Operational Research xxx (xxxx) xxx 
18 